Title: CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13452v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:31:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
# CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Ishani Mondal *1, Yiwen Song 2, Mihir Parmar 2, Palash Goyal 2, Jordan Boyd-Graber 1, Tomas Pfister 2 and Yale Song 2 

> 1University of Maryland, College Park, 2Google

Long-form visual storytelling requires maintaining continuity across shots, including consistent characters, stable environments, and smooth scene transitions. While existing generative models can produce strong individual frames, they fail to preserve such continuity, leading to appearance changes, inconsistent backgrounds, and abrupt scene shifts. We introduce CANVAS (Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding), a multi-agent framework that explicitly plans visual continuity in multi-shot narratives. CANVAS enforces coherence through character continuity, persistent background anchors, and location-aware scene planning for smooth transitions within the same setting We evaluate CANVAS on two storyboard generation benchmarks ST-BENCH and ViStoryBench and introduce a new challenging benchmark HardContinuityBench for long-range narrative consistency. CANVAS consistently outperforms the best-performing baseline, improving background continuity by 21.6%, character consistency by 9.6% and props consistency by 7.6%. Project Website: https://ishani-mondal.github.io/canvas-project-page/ 

1. Introduction 

Long-form visual storytelling requires generating a sequence of images that together form a coher-ent narrative world (Li et al., 2026; Natangelo, 2025). Unlike single-image generation, storyboard generation must preserve long-range consistency across multiple shots: characters should retain stable visual identities, environments should remain consistent when locations reappear, and objects should evolve logically as narrative events unfold. A natural way to enforce such coherence is through 

world-state modeling for visual generation (Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Xiao et al.). In this formula-tion, the generation process maintains an explicit representation of the narrative world—including characters, environments, and object states—that evolves over time. Image generation at each step is conditioned on this evolving narrative representation, enabling the system to maintain long-range visual consistency while faithfully reflecting narrative state changes. Most existing approaches generate story frames sequentially , conditioning each new image on previously generated frames or reference images (Cheng et al., 2024, 2025; Dinkevich et al., 2025; Mao et al., 2026; Zhou et al., 2024). Auto-regressive methods generate frames one-by-one from earlier frames, while reference-based approaches maintain subject identity through latent anchor or diffusion-based techniques using a small set of reference images (Table 1). More recent iterative methods (e.g., Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026)) refine frames by repeatedly conditioning on previously generated story frames to improve global visual similarity. However, these methods primarily enforce short-range consistency and do not explicitly model the evolving narrative world. As a result, incon-sistencies accumulate over time, leading to common failure modes such as character appearance drift, unstable environments when locations reappear, and incorrect object states after narrative events (Figure 1). These issues arise because story world itself is never explicitly represented. In coherent narratives, characters maintain identity unless the plot changes their appearance, environments preserve spatial structure when revisited, and objects follow causal state transitions (e.g., present →

> Corresponding author(s): imondal@umd.edu, yiwensong@google.com, yalesong@google.com *This work was done when Ishani was a Student Researcher at Google.
> arXiv:2604.13452v1 [cs.CL] 15 Apr 2026

CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding Grand museum gallery with marble floors and sculpture alcoves; Ethan in a tweed jacket adjusts a glass case containing agolden artifact.               

> Props Inconsistency (Stolen Artifact changes) Background Inconsistency (Room doesn’t look identical)
> Back in museum gallery. The masked thief approaches the artifact display with careful steps.
> Background Inconsistency (Room doesn’t look identical) Character Drift (Sudden Removal of Cap)
> Props Consistency (Stolen Artifact Looks Same) Background Consistency (Room architecture perfect) Character Consistency
> Ethan re-enters through aside doorway and sees the masked thief; both visible
> Detective Nora in a dark trench coat enters the gallery, scanning; Ethan looks up from case
> Close-up of the golden artifact inside the glass case; gold gleam and etched details

AUTO STUDIO 

Gemini 

CANVAS (Ours) 

Shots 

Figure 1 | Visual storyboards generated by AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025), Gemini-3.1-pro, and CANVAS on a multi-shot museum heist story from our HardContinuityBench. Prior approaches exhibit character appearance drift, unstable scene geometry across consecutive shots, and logical inconsistencies such as artifact state changes, room layout drift across non-consecutive shots. In contrast, CANVAS preserves character identity, stable room layout, artifact state consistency, and object persistence across shots. We use similar colors in the shot descriptions highlighting that those should maintain identical appearance throughout the entire storyline. stolen → absent). We formulate storyboard generation as explicit world-state modeling , maintaining structured representations of characters, locations, and object states as the narrative evolves. We introduce 

CANVAS , a multi-agent framework that enforces continuity through world-state transitions via iterative planning, generation, and memory updates (Section 3). The system first constructs a global continuity plan, then generates each shot by retrieving visual anchors from memory or initializing new ones when needed (e.g., rendering a fireplace in the first Santa Claus scene in Fig 9 (a) enables smooth transitions to later shot (b), whereas without this, the background must change abruptly to accommodate future events, as seen from (c) to (d)). Memory is updated after every generation of each frame, ensuring consistency across long-range narrative dependencies. Another challenge in studying narrative consistency is evaluation. Existing storyboard benchmarks (Zhang et al., 2025a; Zhuang et al., 2025) rarely require long-range reasoning: recurring locations are uncommon, character appearance changes are limited, and object state transitions seldom influence future scenes. Hence, they barely capture subtle forms of narrative drift that occur in longer sequences. To address this limitation, we introduce HardContinuityBench (Section 4), a benchmark specifically designed to stress-test long-range narrative continuity (Details in Appendix A.1). We evaluate CANVAS against several state-of-the-art story visualization baselines on multiple storyboard generation benchmarks like ViStoryBench (Zhuang et al., 2025), ST-Bench (Zhang et al., 2025a) and our new benchmark HardContinuityBench . We propose ContinuityEval , a VLM-based 

2CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Method Char BG Future Multi- Training Consist Consist Cond Agent Free 

StoryGen (Zhang et al., 2025b) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗

Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) ✓ Partial ✗ ✗ ✓

AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓

CANVAS ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

Table 1 | Comparison of existing Story Visualization methods. Most prior methods focus on preserving character consistency across frames using reference images or attention mechanisms. However, these methods do not explicitly maintain recurring location representations or future-conditioned scene planning. Our multi-agent training-free approach tackles these challenges. fine-grained metric on assessing character, background and props continuity. CANVAS consistently outperforms the best-performing baseline on ContinuityEval, improving background continuity by 21.6%, character consistency by 9.6% and props consistency by 7.6% (Section 5). Besides, CANVAS 

outperforms all the existing training-free storyboard generation methods on standard ViStoryBench metrics (Table 3) and video generation performances on standard FilmEval metrics (Huang et al., 2025) (Table 17). Our contributions are threefold: 1. We introduce CANVAS , a training-free multi-agent framework that models storyboard gener-ation as explicit world-state tracking through global planning, memory-guided retrieval, and sequential memory updates. 2. We propose HardContinuityBench , a benchmark designed to stress-test long-range narrative consistency, capturing subtle drift in character identity, environment structure, and object state transitions. 3. Extensive experiments show that CANVAS significantly improves character, background, and prop consistency across multiple storyboard benchmarks. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Visual Story Generation from Text 

Early work on visual storytelling focused on generating sequences of images from textual narratives using generative models. One representative approach is StoryGen (Liu et al., 2024), which intro-duces an autoregressive diffusion-based framework for open-ended visual storytelling. The model generates each frame conditioned on the text description and preceding image-caption pairs using a vision–language context module integrated into Stable Diffusion. During generation, features extracted from earlier frames are injected into the diffusion denoising process, allowing the model to maintain some degree of visual continuity across frames. While StoryGen improves over independent text-to-image generation by conditioning on previous frames, its architecture primarily focuses on appearance-level consistency rather than explicit modeling of narrative state. Because generation is conditioned only on preceding frames, the system lacks a structured representation of characters, locations, or object states. Consequently, errors can accumulate over long sequences, and recurring environments or props are not guaranteed to remain 

> 3CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Figure 2 | Overview of CANVAS Pipeline. The framework generates a sequence of visually coherent cinematic keyframes from a story script through global planning, sequential generation, and persistent visual memory. stable across distant shots. In contrast, CANVAS introduces explicit world-state modeling with persistent character, background, and prop anchors, enabling reasoning about how entities evolve across the story. Another line of work explores architectural modifications to diffusion models to improve cross-frame consistency. StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024) introduces a consistent self-attention mechanism that injects reference tokens from previous frames into the attention computation of the diffusion model. This mechanism allows the model to maintain subject identity across generated frames while preserving the controllability of text prompts. However, StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024) focuses primarily on subject identity preservation, particularly character appearance and attire. The method does not attempt to model narrative structure, scene persistence, or object state evolution across the story. Moreover, because consistency is enforced through attention correlations rather than explicit memory structures, the model lacks a mechanism for reasoning about long-range narrative constraints, such as ensuring that objects change state only when story specifies such events. More recent work explores training-free storyboard generation pipelines. Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) proposes a lightweight consistency mechanism combining latent panel anchoring and reciprocal attention value mixing to maintain subject identity across storyboard panels. The system uses a language model to convert a story into panel-level prompts and then generates panels sequentially using diffusion models. Although Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) improves panel-level coherence and allows dynamic pose and spatial variation, its design prioritizes visual expressiveness and layout diversity rather than strict narrative continuity. The framework does not maintain persistent representations of characters, locations, or props across panels, and therefore cannot explicitly enforce logical consistency when scenes reappear later in the story. In contrast, CANVAS models story generation as an evolving narrative world state, enabling persistent tracking of characters, environments, and objects throughout the story timeline. 

> 4CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

2.2. Multi-Turn Image Generation and Interactive Story Creation 

Another research direction focuses on interactive image generation, where images are generated iteratively through multi-turn user instructions. AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) proposes a multi-agent framework for interactive image generation, combining large language models with diffusion models to maintain subject consistency across multiple turns. The architecture consists of a subject manager that interprets user instructions, a layout generator that predicts bounding boxes for subjects, a supervisor that refines layouts, and a diffusion-based image generator that produces the final image. This design allows AutoStudio to maintain consistency for multiple subjects while responding to user instructions such as adding objects or modifying scene elements. Despite these strengths, AutoStudio primarily addresses interactive editing and layout control rather than long-form narrative consistency. The system focuses on maintaining subject identity within short interactive sessions and does not explicitly model persistent environments or object states across a structured story. As a result, the framework does not address challenges such as maintaining stable environments when scenes reappear or ensuring that object states evolve logically according to narrative events. Similarly, TheaterGen (Cheng et al., 2024) introduces a framework for multi-turn image generation in which a large language model acts as a “screenwriter” that generates a structured prompt book describing characters and layouts. Character prompts are used to generate reference images during a rehearsal stage, and these references guide the final image generation during the diffusion process. The key idea in TheaterGen is character management through prompt planning, which improves semantic consistency in multi-turn generation tasks. However, TheaterGen primarily focuses on character-level consistency, and its architecture generates subjects individually before merging them into the final image. This design can lead to unnatural interactions between characters or inconsistencies in spatial relationships. Moreover, the framework does not maintain persistent representations of environments or objects across a story timeline. Compared to these approaches, CANVAS focuses on story-level coherence rather than interactive editing, introducing explicit mechanisms to maintain background continuity, object persistence, and logical state transitions across narrative events. 

2.3. Memory-Based Narrative Generation 

Several recent works attempt to address long-range consistency using memory mechanisms. StoryMem (Zhang et al., 2025a) reformulates visual storytelling as iterative shot synthesis conditioned on a memory bank of keyframes from previously generated shots. The framework injects these keyframes into a single-shot video diffusion model using a Memory-to-Video architecture, enabling the model to preserve visual context across shots. StoryMem improves cross-shot consistency by storing selected keyframes and using them as conditioning signals during generation. However, the stored memory primarily functions as visual context for conditioning, rather than as an explicit representation of narrative entities. The system does not separately model characters, environments, and objects or reason about how these entities evolve across the story. As a result, the memory acts as a passive reference rather than an interpretable narrative representation. Very recently, VideoMemory (Zhou et al., 2026) introduces an entity-centric dynamic memory bank that stores representations of characters, props, and backgrounds. A multi-agent system retrieves these representations before generating each shot and updates the memory after generation.This architecture improves long-range entity consistency by maintaining persistent visual descriptors of story entities. Nevertheless, VideoMemory primarily focuses on video-level entity persistence rather than storyboard-level reasoning about scene structure. The system retrieves stored representations 

> 5CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

but does not explicitly plan narrative continuity or enforce constraints such as maintaining stable environment geometry across recurring scenes. Furthermore, generation remains largely conditioned on visual descriptors rather than structured narrative reasoning. Against Narrative Weaver (Yao et al., 2026), OneStory (An et al., 2025), and HoloCine (Meng et al., 2025) which bake long-range context or planning into the generator, CANVAS’s advantage is its architecture-agnostic, training-free deployment. However, these training-based methods report strong long-range coherence and could serve as upper-bound references. 

3. CANVAS 

Visual storyboard generation requires maintaining long-range consistency across characters, envi-ronments, and objects throughout a sequence of shots. However, existing approaches often generate frames independently, leading to character appearance drift, unstable environments when locations reappear, and incorrect object states after narrative events. To address these challenges, we propose 

CANVAS , a framework that enforces narrative consistency through three components: global story planning to model character, location, and object evolution; memory-guided sequential generation to retrieve relevant visual anchors across shots; and QA-based candidate selection to ensure that generated frames satisfy continuity constraints (Algorithm 1). We illustrate the pipeline with a running example in Fig. 2. The story follows Ethan and Lena across five shots. They first examine a golden artifact in a museum gallery, later move to a security room where Lena changes into a security jacket, and eventually return to the gallery where the artifact is stolen. In the final shot, Lena reappears in her original blue dress while the display case remains empty. This example highlights the need to preserve character identity, maintain stable environments across recurring locations, and correctly update object states as the narrative unfolds. Formally, the narrative is represented as a sequence of shot descriptions 𝑆 = {𝑠 1, . . . , 𝑠 𝑇 }, and the goal is to generate a sequence of storyboard images 𝐼 = {𝐼 1, . . . , 𝐼 𝑇 } that faithfully depict each shot while remaining consistent with previously generated frames. CANVAS achieves this through global story planning followed by sequential generation with retrieval and memory updates. 

3.1. Global Story Planning 

Independent frame generation cannot ensure narrative consistency across long sequences because the model lacks knowledge about how characters, environments, and objects evolve over time. The planning stage therefore constructs a global representation of these narrative dependencies before image generation begins. The input to the planner is a sequence of shot descriptions 𝑆 = {𝑠 1, . . . , 𝑠 𝑇 }. It produces a global continuity plan denoted by P = (C , L, O) with character appearance states C, location assignments 

L, and object state transitions across the story O (Prompt in Table 23). The plan P constrains how characters, environments, and objects evolve throughout the narrative and provides structured guidance for the next sequential generation stage (Section 3.2). 

Character. Characters must maintain consistent visual identities—face, hairstyle, and clothing— unless the narrative dictates a change. To prevent identity drift, the planner defines a mapping 

C( 𝑐, 𝑡 ) → 𝑘 (Prompt in Table 22), specifying the appearance state 𝑘 for character 𝑐 at shot 𝑡 . In our running example, while Ethan remains in a trench coat, Lena’s timeline tracks her shift from a blue dress ( 𝑠 1, 𝑠 2) to a security jacket ( 𝑠 3, 𝑠 4) and back ( 𝑠 5). These explicit constraints guide the generation stage in retrieving and updating character appearance anchors to ensure long-range coherence. 

> 6CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Algorithm 1: CANVAS 

Input: Shots 𝑆 = {𝑠 1, . . . , 𝑠 𝑇 }

Output: Frames 𝐼 = {𝐼 1, . . . , 𝐼 𝑇 }

1. Global Plan: Extract characters, locations, objects → define states (C , L, O) . Initialize memory M

(characters, locations, frames). 

2. Sequential Generation: for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do 

Retrieve required states from plan. Construct anchor set A𝑡 from: character anchors, previous frame, or location memory. Generate candidates {𝐼 𝑖 𝑡 }.Score each using: prompt alignment + character + background + prop consistency. Select 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

= arg max 𝑖 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝐼 𝑖 𝑡 ).Update memory M with 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

.

return 𝐼 = {𝐼 ∗ 

> 1, . . . , 𝐼 ∗
> 𝑇

}

Location. Stories frequently revisit locations, but without explicit modeling, generators often reconstruct environments inconsistently. To ensure spatial consistency, our planner clusters shots by location identity 𝑙 using the mapping L( 𝑠 𝑡 ) → 𝑙 (Clustering details in Table 20) It further reasons about narrative events to pre-arrange key props that must persist across future scenes (Prompt in Table 21). In our museum example, assigning consistent identities to shots (𝑠 1, 𝑠 2, 𝑠 4, 𝑠 5) allows the system to reuse stored background anchors, preserving the overall scene structure when location reappears. 

Object State. Objects often change state, altering the visual environment when moved or removed. Without explicit tracking, generators may produce “ghost” objects or outdated scene elements. The planner models this evolution through the mapping O( 𝑜, 𝑡 ) → state (Prompt in Table 23), specifying an object 𝑜 ’s status at shot 𝑡 . In our museum example, the golden artifact’s transition from “present” (𝑠 1 − 𝑠 3) to “stolen” ( 𝑠 4) and “absent ( 𝑠 5) signals the generator to update the scene configuration, ensuring long-range logical consistency. 

3.2. Sequential Generation with Memory 

While the global plan specifies how the story evolves, maintaining visual consistency requires reusing previously generated visual information. CANVAS therefore generates shots sequentially while maintaining a persistent world memory. 

Visual State Memory. The system maintains a persistent visual memory denoted by M = (M 𝑐 , M𝑙 , M 𝑓 ).Here M𝑐 stores character appearance anchor images, M𝑙 stores background anchor images associated with locations, and M 𝑓 stores previously generated frame images. 

Anchor Retrieval. For each shot 𝑠 𝑡 , the system first queries the global plan P to determine the required character appearances C( 𝑐, 𝑡 ), the location identity L( 𝑠 𝑡 ), and the object states O( 𝑜, 𝑡 )

(Algorithm 2). Based on this information and the current memory M, the system retrieves a set of conditioning anchors denoted by A𝑡 .If the shot directly continues the previous scene without structural changes, the system retrieves the previous frame together with the required character anchors using 𝐴 𝑡 = {𝐼 𝑡 −1} ∪ {M 𝑐 }. This preserves spatial layout, camera orientation, and character placement across consecutive shots . 

> 7CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

If the shot revisits an existing location but introduces a different camera viewpoint, the sys-tem retrieves the stored location anchor together with the required character anchors using 𝐴 𝑡 =

{M 𝑙 (L( 𝑠 𝑡 ))} ∪ {M 𝑐 (𝑐, C( 𝑐, 𝑡 ))} .If the location appears for the first time and no background anchor exists in memory, generation proceeds using only the relevant character anchors. 

Candidate Generation and Selection. Given the retrieved anchors A𝑡 and the shot description  

> 𝑠 𝑡

, the image generator produces a set of candidate frames {𝐼 1   

> 𝑡 , 𝐼 2
> 𝑡 , . . . , 𝐼 𝑁 𝑡

} (Prompt in Table 25). To select the most consistent frame, CANVAS uses a QA-based selector that evaluates each candidate through a set of targeted visual questions derived from the global continuity plan (Algorithm 3). These questions verify whether character appearances match C( 𝑐, 𝑡 ), object states follow O( 𝑜, 𝑡 ), and the environment structure corresponds to the location assignment L( 𝑠 𝑡 ) and the shot-description alignment. Each candidate is scored based on its answers to these consistency checks, and the final frame is selected as 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

= argmax 𝑖 Score (𝐼 𝑖 𝑡 | 𝑠 𝑡 , P) , where the scoring function aggregates QA-based evaluations to measure narrative alignment and consistency. 

Memory Update. After selecting the final frame 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

, the system extracts updated anchors from the generated image and updates the memory before proceeding to the next shot (Algorithm 4). If a character 𝑐 is clearly visible in the frame, the system extracts the appearance anchor and updates 

M𝑐 (𝑐, C( 𝑐, 𝑡 )) . If the visual structure of a location changes due to an object state transition specified by 

O( 𝑜, 𝑡 ), the system extracts a new background anchor and updates M𝑙 (L( 𝑠 𝑡 )) . For objects that appear in the frame, the system also extracts visual anchors and updates the prop memory M𝑜 (𝑜, O( 𝑜, 𝑡 )) ,storing the current visual state of the object. This allows later shots to retrieve the correct object appearance when the object reappears or when the scene must reflect a changed object state. Finally, the selected frame 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

is stored in M 𝑓 so that the next shot can reuse the frame when the scene continues. The running example in Figure 2 illustrates this process. In shot 𝑠 1, the museum gallery appears for the first time, so generation proceeds without a background anchor and the resulting frame 𝐼 ∗

> 1

initializes the gallery and character anchors in memory. In shot 𝑠 2, the system retrieves the previous frame and character anchors to preserve the gallery layout. In shot 𝑠 3, Lena enters a new location (the security room), so the scene is generated without a location anchor and the new environment is stored afterward. In shot 𝑠 4, Lena returns to the gallery wearing the security jacket; the system retrieves the gallery background and her updated appearance anchor. Because the artifact is stolen, the gallery background anchor is updated to reflect the empty display case. Finally, in shot 𝑠 5, the system retrieves the updated gallery anchor together with Lena’s blue-dress appearance anchor. Through this sequential cycle of retrieval, generation, and memory update, CANVAS preserves character identity, maintains consistent environments across recurring locations, and correctly reflects object state changes throughout the story. 

4. Experimental Setup 

Datasets. We evaluate CANVAS on two existing storyboard generation benchmarks: ViStoryBench-Lite (Zhuang et al., 2025) (20 stories) and ST-Bench , derived from StoryMem (Zhang et al., 2025a) (30 stories). However, these datasets provide limited challenges : recurring locations rarely reappear after long gaps, character appearance changes are uncommon, and spatial dependencies across future events are seldom required. To better evaluate long-range continuity reasoning, we introduce Hard-ContinuityBench , a dataset generated through GPT-5.2 prompting to create storyboard narratives 

> 8

CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding                                                                                                                      

> Dataset Method Background Consistency Props Character Char Avg Consecutive Non-Consecutive PropCons FaceCons ClothCons BodyCons ViStoryBench AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 3.42 3.68 3.51 3.70 3.50 3.80 3.67 (Zhuang et al., 2025) Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) 3.66 3.85 3.60 3.80 3.60 3.90 3.77 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) 3.20 3.43 3.18 3.60 3.40 3.60 3.53 Gemini-CT (Comanici et al., 2025) 4.52 4.00 4.56 4.05 4.12 3.98 4.05
> CANVAS (Ours) 4.83 4.83 4.88 4.25 4.52 4.12 4.30
> ST-Bench AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 3.33 3.58 3.38 3.60 3.40 3.70 3.57 (Zhang et al., 2025a) Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) 3.70 3.85 3.78 3.80 3.60 3.90 3.77 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) 3.22 3.50 2.89 3.70 3.50 3.80 3.67 Gemini-CT (Comanici et al., 2025) 4.62 3.99 4.41 4.05 3.92 3.98 3.98
> CANVAS (Ours) 4.94 4.73 4.73 4.18 4.45 4.08 4.24
> HardContinuity AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 3.05 3.18 2.90 3.90 3.05 3.30 3.42 Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) 3.65 3.65 2.56 4.78 3.81 4.27 4.29 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) 3.33 3.33 2.23 4.39 3.78 4.02 4.06 Gemini-CT (Comanici et al., 2025) 4.48 3.83 4.06 4.63 4.27 4.27 4.39
> CANVAS (Ours) 4.88 4.88 4.19 4.95 4.91 4.87 4.91

Table 2 | Comparison of storyboard generation systems under the ContinuityEval framework using gemini-2.5-Flash as Judge. Background consistency is reported separately for consecutive shot transitions and non-consecutive scene reappearances. PropCons measures identity consistency of movable objects. Character continuity evaluates identity preservation using facial appearance, clothing attributes, and hair/body cues. The final column reports the average character consistency . To avoid the risk of circularity/bias in generation and evaluation, we also compare methods using GPT5 as Judge and report results in Table 15. with deliberately challenging continuity conditions. The dataset emphasizes recurring locations, long-range scene reappearances, character appearance changes, and occlusion across cinematic shot transitions (e.g., wide shots followed by close-ups), requiring models to preserve spatial layouts and character identity even when elements temporarily disappear. HardContinuityBench, though small, contains structured narratives and is intended to stress-test world-state consistency across extended shot sequences (Details in Appendix in Table 8). 

Baselines and Implementation. We implement CANVAS using Gemini-3-pro-image as the back-bone image generation model. Since CANVAS is training-free , we compare it against recent state-of-the-art methods that operate under a similar inference-time setting from Table 1. Specifically, we select all training-free baselines from Table 1 and, for fair comparison, re-implement AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025), Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026), and Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) using the same Gemini backbone. Apart from this, we also consider Gemini-Contextual (Gemini-CT) as a baseline where we prompt the model to generate the image per shot with the previous keyframe and character anchor image as the context. We choose this baseline since it achieves the best prompt-following performance on ViStoryBench-Lite (Zhuang et al., 2025). All methods take the shot-level textual descriptions of a story as input, along with canonical reference images for each character when available. For datasets such as ViStoryBench-Lite (Zhuang et al., 2025), these canonical character images are provided as part of the benchmark. However, for ST-Bench 

(Zhang et al., 2025a) and our proposed HardContinuityBench , such references are not available. In these cases, we first generate canonical character images from their textual descriptions and use them as identity anchors to guide the generation of continuous keyframes across shots. 

Automatic Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate CANVAS using two complementary settings targeting different aspects of storyboard quality. First, we introduce ContinuityEval , a fine-grained continuity evaluator that measures whether generated shots maintain a coherent visual world across camera cuts. Storyboard generation models often introduce inconsistencies such as character appearance drift, environment layout changes, or objects appearing/disappearing across shots. ContinuityEval 

9CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding AutoStudio     

> Gemini
> Story2Board
> StoryIter
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90 90.9
> 68.5
> 85.0 83.3
> AutoStudio
> Gemini
> Story2Board
> StoryIter
> 86.7
> 70.0
> 79.5 83.3
> AutoStudio
> Gemini
> Story2Board
> StoryIter
> 86.7
> 68.3
> 80.0 80.0
> AutoStudio
> Gemini
> Story2Board
> StoryIter
> 90.9
> 66.5
> 75.4
> 85.7

Baseline Model 

> CANVAS Win Rate (%)

Background Characters Overall Props 

Figure 3 | Human pairwise preference win-rates of CANVAS against baseline storyboard generation systems across four continuity dimensions: background, props, characters, and overall coherence. Win-rates are computed on 240 side-by-side comparison of scenes and aggregated across 15 annotators.                                                         

> Method CSD ↑CIDS ↑PA ↑CM ↑Inc ↑Aes ↑
> Cross Self Cross Self Avg Story-Iter 0.48 0.67 0.60 0.71 3.39 57.34 14.33 4.55 Story2Board 0.23 0.45 0.35 0.39 2.92 44.44 11.93 4.56 AutoStudio 0.34 0.63 0.44 0.46 3.39 56.22 14.34 3.45 Gemini-CT 0.38 0.62 0.58 0.65 3.61 59.97 12.50 5.54
> CANVAS 0.49 0.72 0.61 0.71 3.60 60.34 13.89 5.60

Table 3 | Comparison on ViStoryBench-Lite. Metrics include Style Diversity (CSD), Character Identity Similarity (CIDS), Prompt Alignment (PA), OCCM (CM), Inception (Inc), and Aesthetic score (Aes). is model-agnostic and shows strong agreement with human judgments ( 0.74 Fleiss’ 𝜅 ). We select the two VLM-as-Judge evaluators with the highest Pearson correlation with human ratings (details in Appendix A.7, Table 14). Unlike prior embedding-based metrics, ContinuityEval evaluates three dimensions: character consistency (face, clothing, body identity), background consistency (geo-metric stability of environments), and prop consistency (identity and placement of movable objects across shots) (Appendix in Table 6, Table 9, Table 11, Table 28, Table 29). Second, we perform a 

benchmark-based evaluation on ViStoryBench (Zhuang et al., 2025) to assess prompt alignment and frame quality using the benchmark’s standard metrics, enabling direct comparison with prior methods (Table 3). 

Human Preference User Study. In addition to VLM-based automatic scoring, we conduct a human preference study to evaluate narrative consistency. We randomly sample 20 stories (60 scenes) from the benchmark datasets and construct pairwise comparisons between the stories generated by 

CANVAS and four baselines (Gemini, Story2Board, StoryIter, AutoStudio), resulting in 240 comparison pairs. Fifteen annotators evaluate randomly sampled pairs across four dimensions: background consistency , prop consistency , character consistency , and overall preference (Human Annotation Instructions in Appendix A.6). 

5. Main Results 

We evaluate CANVAS on multiple storyboard generation benchmarks to measure its ability to maintain long-range visual consistency across shots. Across all datasets and evaluation protocols, CANVAS 

consistently improves background stability, prop-state consistency, and character identity preservation compared to existing baselines. 

> 10 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Method FaceCons ClothCons BodyCons Char Avg 

CANVAS (Full) 4.18 4.45 4.08 4.24 

– Canonical Character Anchor 2.55 2.76 2.47 2.59 – Character Anchor Retrieval 4.10 4.08 3.96 4.05 – Character Memory Update 4.09 4.12 3.89 4.03 Table 4 | Character-memory ablation for CANVAS . Removing canonical anchors causes the largest degradation in identity consistency, while disabling retrieval or memory updates leads to moderate drops. Method Consecutive Non-Consecutive Prop Cons 

CANVAS (Full) 4.94 4.73 4.73 

– Location Grouping 2.45 3.34 4.45 – Future Planning 4.76 4.11 3.55 – Background Reuse 2.12 2.44 4.54 – Prop State Update 4.34 4.33 3.76 Table 5 | Ablation analysis of CANVAS backgroud and prop-state memory components. Removing location grouping and background reuse severely degrades scene consistency across shots, while disabling prop planning or state updates reduces object state consistency in the narrative. 

Evaluation on ContinuityEval. Table 2 reports results using our ContinuityEval framework. Across all datasets, CANVAS consistently outperforms the strongest baseline (Gemini-CT) in background and prop consistency while also improving character identity. On ViStoryBench-Lite (Zhuang et al., 2025) and ST-Bench (Zhang et al., 2025a), CANVAS improves consecutive background consistency by about 6–7% and non-consecutive scene reappearances by about 12%, while prop and character consistency improve by 6–7%. On HardContinuityBench, which stresses long-range narrative reason-ing, improvements are larger, reaching +8.9% for consecutive backgrounds, +14.0% for long-range scene reappearances, and +11.8% for character consistency. Overall, CANVAS achieves 6–9% gains in consecutive and 12–14% improvements in non-consecutive scene consistency. 

Evaluation on Standard ViStoryBench Metrics. Table 3 compares CANVAS with recent training-free storyboard generation methods on ViStoryBench-Lite (Zhuang et al., 2025). CANVAS achieves the best overall performance across most metrics, improving style consistency and character consistency while maintaining strong prompt alignment and visual quality. These results indicate that the proposed continuity planning and memory mechanisms effectively preserve narrative coherence without sacrificing visual fidelity. 

User Study Results. Figure 8 reports human pairwise preference win-rates of CANVAS against baseline methods across four dimensions: background continuity, prop consistency, character identity, and overall coherence. Across all dimensions, CANVAS is consistently preferred by annotators, achieving win-rates up to 90.9% for background and prop consistency, 86.7% for character consistency, and 86.7% overall when compared against AutoStudio, and 68.3% against our strongest baseline. These results indicate that human evaluators strongly prefer CANVAS -generated storyboards on all criteria. 

> 11 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding CANVAS (w/o Char Memory)
> CANVAS (w/o Background Memory)
> CANVAS
> Gemini-CT
> Story2Board

Figure 4 | Qualitative Examples of Train Story from HardContinuityBench along with ablation showing the importance of Background and Character Memory Update in CANVAS. 

6. Further Analysis 

We ablate three main continuity mechanisms in CANVAS : character memory , background memory ,and prop-state memory , on 20 sampled stories (including HardContinuityBench). Each variant removes one module while keeping the rest of the pipeline unchanged and is evaluated using ContinuityEval .Besides, we also ablate by removing QA selection techniques (Table 12). 

Character Memory. Removing the canonical character anchors causes the largest degradation across all character consistency metrics, since the generator no longer has a fixed visual reference to preserve identity cues such as facial structure, clothing style, and body appearance. As a result, 

Face , Cloth , and Body similarity drop by 39.0% (4.18 →2.55), 38.0% (4.45 →2.76), and 39.5% 

(4.08 →2.47), respectively. In contrast, disabling anchor retrieval leads to smaller declines— 1.9% 

(Face), 8.3% (Cloth), and 2.9% (Body)—since anchors exist but are not used during generation, while removing memory updates results in moderate drops of 2.2% , 7.4% , and 4.7% .

Background and Prop Memory. Background memory is critical for scene continuity: removing 

location grouping or background reuse reduces background consistency by up to 50–57% . Removing future planning mainly affects long-range scene and prop consistency, while disabling prop-state updates reduces object consistency by about 20% . Overall, these results confirm that CANVAS ’s memory mechanisms are essential for maintaining coherent environments and object states. 

Effect of Candidate Variants. Increasing the number of generated variants mainly improves char-acter consistency, as the selection step can choose candidates best aligned with character anchors. 

> 12 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Background and prop consistency remain largely stable due to memory constraints (Figure 7). Perfor-mance saturates at 𝑁 = 3, providing the best balance between quality and computation. 

7. Qualitative Analysis 

Across the train-station storyline (Fig. 4), prior approaches fail to preserve recurring environments and stable character identity. Story2Board alters station layout and signage across shots, CANVAS 

maintains consistent platform geometry, signage, and lighting while preserving the protagonist’s appearance. In the laboratory storyline (Fig. 10), AutoStudio and Story-Iter fail to maintain object and environment persistence, with robot design, lab equipment, and corridor layouts changing across shots. CANVAS preserves consistency. 

Ablation. Removing background memory/planning causes location drift across shots, while removing character memory leads to identity changes in facial features and clothing (Fig. 4). Removing prop updates breaks object-state continuity in the museum heist example (Fig. 7). 

8. Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper, we introduce CANVAS, a training-free framework for generating coherent multi-shot visual storyboards from textual narratives by explicitly models long-range narrative continuity. The framework maintains three key dimensions of narrative coherence: character identity consistency, background continuity, and prop-state persistence. To systematically evaluate these properties, we also introduced HardContinuityBench and a fine-grained ContinuityEval framework that measures visual consistency across multiple dimensions of characters, environments, and objects. In future, we plan to explore interactive human-in-the-loop visual storytelling, where users iteratively refine scenes, characters or provide natural language feedback while maintaining global continuity. 

Limitations 

Despite promising results, CANVAS has a few limitations. First, the framework currently relies on large image generation models, making generation computationally expensive when producing multiple candidate shots for QA-based selection. Second, although CANVAS improves continuity across characters, backgrounds, and props, it does not yet fully model fine-grained physical interactions or complex motion dynamics across shots. Third, the system assumes that narrative entities such as characters, locations, and objects can be reliably extracted from text, which may be challenging for ambiguous or highly abstract narratives. Finally, the dataset size of HardContinuityBench is small, though we have used to stress-test our model, we plan to augment with more samples. 

Use of AI assistants. The authors used AI tools (OpenAI’s ChatGPT, Google Gemini, Anthropic’s Claude) for coding assistance during data analysis and visualization, and as a writing assistant limited to paraphrasing for conciseness. All substantive content, analysis, and conclusions are the authors’ own work. 

Ethical Considerations 

The data collection did not involve any crowdsourcing platforms. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the institutional Ethics Review Board following a detailed assessment of the data 

> 13 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

collection procedures. 

Potential Risks and Harms. While improving long-range visual consistency enhances narrative coherence, it may also enable the creation of more realistic synthetic content, raising concerns about misuse for misinformation, deepfakes, and fabricated visual evidence. 

References 

Z. An, M. Jia, H. Qiu, Z. Zhou, X. Huang, Z. Liu, W. Ren, K. Kahatapitiya, D. Liu, S. He, C. Zhang, T. Xiang, F. Yang, S. Belongie, and T. Xie. Onestory: Coherent multi-shot video generation with adaptive memory, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.07802 .J. Cheng, B. Yin, K. Cai, M. Huang, H. Li, Y. He, X. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Li, Y. Cheng, et al. Theatergen: Character management with llm for consistent multi-turn image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18919 ,2024. J. Cheng, X. Lu, H. Li, K. L. Zai, B. Yin, Y. Cheng, Y. Yan, and X. Liang. Autostudio: Crafting consistent subjects in multi-turn interactive image generation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2406.01388 .G. Comanici, E. Bieber, M. Schaekermann, I. Pasupat, N. Sachdeva, I. Dhillon, M. Blistein, O. Ram, D. Zhang, and E. R. et. al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2507.06261 .D. Dinkevich, M. Levy, O. Avrahami, D. Samuel, and D. Lischinski. Story2board: A training-free approach for expressive storyboard generation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508. 09983 .D. Ha and J. Schmidhuber. World models. 2018. doi: 10.5281/ZENODO.1207631. URL https: //zenodo.org/record/1207631 .K. Huang, Y. Huang, X. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Ning, P. Wan, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, and X. Liu. Filmaster: Bridging cinematic principles and generative ai for automated film generation, 2025. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2506.18899 .J. Li, X. Guo, Y. Wu, R. K.-W. Lee, H. Li, and Y. Xie. Lost in stories: Consistency bugs in long story generation by llms, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.05890 .C. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Zhong, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie. Intelligent grimm - open-ended visual storytelling via latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 6190–6200, June 2024. J. Mao, X. Huang, Y. Xie, Y. Chang, M. Hui, B. Xu, Z. Zheng, Z. Wang, C. Xie, and Y. Zhou. Story-iter: A training-free iterative paradigm for long story visualization, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2410.06244 .Y. Meng, H. Ouyang, Y. Yu, Q. Wang, W. Wang, K. L. Cheng, H. Wang, Y. Li, C. Chen, Y. Zeng, Y. Shen, and H. Qu. Holocine: Holistic generation of cinematic multi-shot long video narratives, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.20822 .S. Natangelo. The narrative continuity test: A conceptual framework for evaluating identity persistence in ai systems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24831 .

> 14 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

M. Wang, H. Ding, J. Peng, Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, and Y. Wei. Characonsist: Fine-grained consistent character generation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11533 .C. Wu, J. Li, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Gao, K. Yan, S. ming Yin, S. Bai, X. Xu, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Tang, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, A. Yang, B. Yu, C. Cheng, D. Liu, D. Li, H. Zhang, H. Meng, H. Wei, J. Ni, K. Chen, K. Cao, L. Peng, L. Qu, M. Wu, P. Wang, S. Yu, T. Wen, W. Feng, X. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu, Y. Cai, and Z. Liu. Qwen-image technical report, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02324 .C. Wu, P. Zheng, R. Yan, S. Xiao, X. Luo, Y. Wang, W. Li, X. Jiang, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, Z. Liu, Z. Xia, C. Li, H. Deng, J. Wang, K. Luo, B. Zhang, D. Lian, X. Wang, Z. Wang, T. Huang, and Z. Liu. Omnigen2: Exploration to advanced multimodal generation, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506. 18871 .Z. Xiao, L. Yushi, Y. Zhou, W. Ouyang, S. Yang, Y. Zeng, and X. Pan. Worldmem: Long-term consistent world simulation with memory. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .S. Yang, Y. Ge, Y. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Ge, Y. Shan, and Y. Chen. Seed-story: Multimodal long story generation with large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08683 , 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2407.08683 .Z. Yao, Y. Li, X. Gao, Q. Chen, P. Jiang, and Y. Lu. Narrative weaver: Towards controllable long-range visual consistency with multi-modal conditioning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603. 06688 .K. Zhang, L. Jiang, A. Wang, J. Z. Fang, T. Zhi, Q. Yan, H. Kang, X. Lu, and X. Pan. Storymem: Multi-shot long video storytelling with memory, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.19539 .P. Zhang, Z. Jia, K. Liu, S. Weng, S. Li, and B. Shi. Stage: Storyboard-anchored generation for cinematic multi-shot narrative, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.12372 .J. Zhou, Y. Du, X. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Zhuang, Y. Zhang, S. Li, X. Hu, B. Su, and Y. cong Chen. Videomemory: Toward consistent video generation via memory integration, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2601.03655 .Y. Zhou, D. Zhou, M.-M. Cheng, J. Feng, and Q. Hou. Storydiffusion: Consistent self-attention for long-range image and video generation, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.01434 .C. Zhuang, A. Huang, Y. Hu, J. Wu, W. Cheng, J. Liao, H. Wang, X. Liao, W. Cai, H. Xu, X. Zhang, X. Zeng, Z. Huang, G. Yu, and C. Zhang. Vistorybench: Comprehensive benchmark suite for story visualization, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.24862 .

A. Appendix Organization 

We organize the appendix section to provide additional details to reproduce our pipeline: 

• ContinuityEval Implementation Details (Appendix A.2) 

• Computational Efficiency Analysis in Appendix A.3 

• Detailed Related Work in Appendix A.4 

• Human Evaluation (User Study Instructions) in Appendix A.6 

• Impact of StoryBoard Quality on VideoGeneration using FilMaster Continuity and Expressiveness Measures (Appendix A.8) 

> 15 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding CANVAS (w/o Char Memory)
> CANVAS (w/o Background Memory)
> CANVAS
> Gemini-CT
> Story2Board

Figure 5 | Qualitative Examples of Train Story (Zoomed-in) from HardContinuityBench along with ablation showing the importance of Background and Character Memory Update in CANVAS. 

• CANVAS Prompts and Implementation Algorithms and Case Study (Appendix A.9) 

• HardContinuityBench Creation Prompt, additional statistics of the dataset 

• ContinuityEval Validation (Correlation with Human Judgement and Inter-Model Judgement Agreement) in Appendix in Table 14 

• More Ablation Analysis (without QA) in Table 12 

A.1. Why HardContinuityBench is Hard? 

Table 8 highlights the structural differences between HardContinuityBench and existing storyboard benchmarks. Compared to ViStoryBench-Lite and ST-Bench, HardContinuityBench increases the likelihood of long-range dependencies such as recurring locations and delayed character reappearances by introducing significantly larger temporal gaps between scene reappearances, often requiring models to reconstruct environments after multiple intervening shots such as close-ups where the background is not visible. The dataset also includes more frequent character appearance changes and object state transitions, forcing systems to track evolving world states across the narrative. These characteristics make HardContinuityBench a substantially more challenging benchmark for evaluating long-range visual continuity in storyboard generation. 

A.2. Character Consistency Evaluation 

To measure whether characters remain visually consistent across a generated storyboard, we design a Character Consistency Evaluator as part of the ContinuityEval framework. The goal of this evaluator is to quantify how well a character preserves identity attributes across multiple appearances throughout the narrative. Given a sequence of generated storyboard frames 𝐼 1, 𝐼 2, ..., 𝐼 𝑇 and corresponding shot descriptions 

> 16 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Face Identity Evaluation Prompt. 

You are given two storyboard frames, Frame A and Frame B. The same character is expected to appear in both frames. Determine whether the faces correspond to the same individual. Focus only on the specified character. Ignore other people and background objects. Compare the following facial attributes: facial shape, eye shape and spacing, nose structure, jawline and chin structure, facial proportions, skin tone, and facial hair if present. Ignore changes caused by camera angle, facial expression, lighting conditions, or partial occlusion. Assign a score using the following rules: 5 — All visible facial features match. Facial structure, proportions, and distinctive features are consistent across both frames. 4 — All major facial features match. Minor variations appear only in rendering detail. 3 — At least half of the visible facial attributes match, but other attributes differ or are unclear. 2 — Fewer than half of the facial attributes match. 1 — Most visible facial attributes do not match. If the face of the character is not visible in one or both frames, return null .Table 6 | Prompt used for Calculating Facial Identity Consistency. 

𝑆 1, 𝑆 2, ..., 𝑆 𝑇 , we first extract all characters mentioned in the shot descriptions using a language model. Character mentions referring to the same individual are canonicalized into a unified identity representation. For each character 𝑐 , we then construct a temporal appearance sequence 

𝑇 𝑐 = (𝐼 𝑡 1 , 𝐼 𝑡 2 , ..., 𝐼 𝑡 𝑘 )

where 𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 denotes the 𝑖 -th frame in which character 𝑐 appears. The sequence represents the chronological timeline of that character’s appearances across the storyboard. Character continuity is evaluated by comparing consecutive appearances of the same character in the timeline unless appearance change is required. For each pair of adjacent frames (𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 +1 ), a Vision–Language Model evaluates identity consistency using three attribute groups: facial identity, clothing attributes, and hair/body appearance. Each attribute is evaluated independently using dedicated prompts and scored on a Likert scale from 1 to 5. The facial identity evaluator compares structural facial features including facial shape, eye configuration, nose structure, jawline, facial proportions, and facial hair when visible. Differences caused by viewpoint, expression, lighting, or partial occlusion are ignored (Prompt in Table 6). The clothing evaluator measures consistency of garment category, clothing structure, layering, dominant color palette, and fabric appearance. Minor changes caused by lighting or folds are ignored (Prompt in Table 9). The hair and body evaluator measures consistency of hairstyle, hair length, hair color, body silhouette, and wearable accessories such as glasses, hats, or backpacks (Prompt in Table 11). For each frame transition (𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 +1 ) the evaluator produces three attribute scores: 

𝑓 𝑖 = FaceScore (𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 +1 , 𝑐 )

𝑐𝑙 𝑖 = ClothingScore (𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 +1 , 𝑐 )

ℎ𝑏 𝑖 = HairBodyScore (𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 , 𝐼 𝑡 𝑖 +1 , 𝑐 )

> 17 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Clothing Consistency Evaluation Prompt. 

You are given two storyboard frames containing the same character. Evaluate whether the clothing worn by the character is consistent across the frames. Focus only on the clothing worn by the character. Compare the following attributes: garment category (coat, jacket, shirt, dress, uniform), clothing structure (sleeve length, coat length, collar type), clothing layers (for example jacket over shirt), dominant colors, patterns or logos, and fabric appearance. Ignore differences caused only by lighting changes or cloth wrinkles. Assign a score using the following rules: 5 — Garment type, structure, color palette, and patterns are identical. 4 — Garment type and structure are identical, and color palette differs only slightly. 3 — Garment type matches but structural details or colors differ. 2 — Garment type differs but some colors or patterns match. 1 — Garment type, structure, and colors are completely different. Table 7 | Prompt used for Calculating Clothing Similarity Consistency.                      

> Statistic ViStoryBench-Lite ST-Bench HardContinuityBench
> Stories 20 30 5Recurring Location Reappearances Rare Occasional Frequent
> Avg. Gap Between Location Reappearances (shots) 1.4 2.3 5.6
> Character Appearance Changes Rare Limited Common
> Prop State Transitions (per story) 0.8 1.2 3.6
> Long-Range Scene Reconstruction Required Low Moderate High

Table 8 | Dataset statistics comparing HardContinuityBench with existing storyboard benchmarks. HardContinuityBench contains longer narratives, more recurring environments, larger temporal gaps between scene reappearances, and more object state transitions. These properties require models to maintain persistent world representations of characters, locations, and objects rather than relying only on short-range frame conditioning. If an attribute cannot be evaluated due to severe occlusion or cropping, the evaluator returns a null value and that attribute is excluded from aggregation. The transition identity score is then computed as the mean of the available attribute scores: 

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑖 = mean ( 𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑐𝑙 𝑖 , ℎ𝑏 𝑖 )

For a character appearing in 𝑘 frames, the overall character consistency score is computed as the average of the transition scores across the timeline: 

𝐶𝐼 𝐷𝑆 (𝑐 ) = 1

𝑘 − 1

> 𝑘 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑖 

where 𝑘 − 1 represents the number of temporal transitions for the character. Finally, the overall Character Identity Consistency Score for the story is obtained by averaging across all characters appearing in the narrative: 

𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑐 𝑦 = 1

|𝐶 |∑︁ 𝑐 ∈𝐶 

𝐶𝐼 𝐷𝑆 (𝑐 )

where 𝐶 denotes the set of characters present in the storyboard. 

> 18 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

1 2 3 4 5

Number of Variants (N) 

3.5 

4.0 

4.5 

5.0 

> Consistency Score (1 5)

Optimal N=3 

# Effect of Candidate Variants 

> Face
> Clothing
> Background
> Prop

Figure 6 | Effect of generating N candidates on the ContinuityEval metrics. CANVAS (w/o Prop Update) 

> CANVAS

Figure 7 | Qualitative Ablation showing the importance of Prop-State Tracking in CANVAS. The resulting score lies in the range [1, 5], where higher values indicate stronger visual identity preservation across shots and lower values indicate character appearance drift or identity inconsistency. 

A.3. Computational Efficiency 

All evaluated pipelines operate in a training-free inference setting where the heavy computation (image generation and reasoning) is performed through hosted multimodal APIs. As a result, the local system only performs lightweight orchestration such as prompt construction, memory updates, and image I/O, allowing all methods to run on standard CPU-only machines without requiring local GPUs. 

Story2Board. Story2Board generates one image per shot using a single API call, resulting in linear complexity 𝑂 (𝑆 ) where 𝑆 is the number of shots. The method has minimal overhead since it performs no additional reasoning or verification. 

> 19 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

StoryIter. StoryIter performs iterative refinement of frames across multiple passes. If 𝐼 refinement iterations are used, the pipeline requires 𝑆 (𝐼 + 1) image-generation API calls. While the method includes local CLIP-based similarity computation for reference selection, this step is lightweight and can run on CPU. 

CANVAS. CANVAS introduces additional reasoning and verification steps to enforce visual continuity. Each shot involves prop-state reasoning, multi-candidate image generation, and VLM-based candidate evaluation. With 𝐾 generated candidates per shot, the total number of API calls is approximately 

1+𝐶 +𝑆 (1+3𝐾 ), where 𝐶 denotes the number of characters requiring canonical initialization. Although CANVAS incurs higher inference-time API usage, it maintains low local computational overhead and still runs efficiently on CPU-only systems. Overall, the runtime of all pipelines is dominated by API latency rather than local computation, and all methods remain computationally lightweight compared to training-based approaches. 

A.4. Positioning of CANVAS 

A.4.1. Visual Story Generation from Text. 

Early work on visual storytelling focused on generating sequences of images from textual narratives using generative models. One representative approach is StoryGen (Liu et al., 2024), which intro-duces an autoregressive diffusion-based framework for open-ended visual storytelling. The model generates each frame conditioned on the text description and preceding image-caption pairs using a vision–language context module integrated into Stable Diffusion. During generation, features extracted from earlier frames are injected into the diffusion denoising process, allowing the model to maintain some degree of visual continuity across frames. While StoryGen improves over independent text-to-image generation by conditioning on previous frames, its architecture primarily focuses on appearance-level consistency rather than explicit modeling of narrative state. Because generation is conditioned only on preceding frames, the system lacks a structured representation of characters, locations, or object states. Consequently, errors can accumulate over long sequences, and recurring environments or props are not guaranteed to remain stable across distant shots. In contrast, CANVAS introduces explicit world-state modeling with persistent character, background, and prop anchors, enabling reasoning about how entities evolve across the story. Another line of work explores architectural modifications to diffusion models to improve cross-frame consistency. StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024) introduces a consistent self-attention mechanism that injects reference tokens from previous frames into the attention computation of the diffusion model. This mechanism allows the model to maintain subject identity across generated frames while preserving the controllability of text prompts. However, StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024) focuses primarily on subject identity preservation, particularly character appearance and attire. The method does not attempt to model narrative structure, scene persistence, or object state evolution across the story. Moreover, because consistency is enforced through attention correlations rather than explicit memory structures, the model lacks a mechanism for reasoning about long-range narrative constraints, such as ensuring that objects change state only when story specifies such events. More recent work explores training-free storyboard generation pipelines. Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) proposes a lightweight consistency mechanism combining latent panel anchoring and reciprocal attention value mixing to maintain subject identity across storyboard panels. The system uses a language model to convert a story into panel-level prompts and then generates panels 

> 20 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

sequentially using diffusion models. Although Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) improves panel-level coherence and allows dynamic pose and spatial variation, its design prioritizes visual expressiveness and layout diversity rather than strict narrative continuity. The framework does not maintain persistent representations of characters, locations, or props across panels, and therefore cannot explicitly enforce logical consistency when scenes reappear later in the story. In contrast, CANVAS models story generation as an evolving narrative world state, enabling persistent tracking of characters, environments, and objects throughout the story timeline. 

A.4.2. Multi-Turn Image Generation and Interactive Story Creation 

Another research direction focuses on interactive image generation, where images are generated iteratively through multi-turn user instructions. AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) proposes a multi-agent framework for interactive image generation, combining large language models with diffusion models to maintain subject consistency across multiple turns. The architecture consists of a subject manager that interprets user instructions, a layout generator that predicts bounding boxes for subjects, a supervisor that refines layouts, and a diffusion-based image generator that produces the final image. This design allows AutoStudio to maintain consistency for multiple subjects while responding to user instructions such as adding objects or modifying scene elements. Despite these strengths, AutoStudio primarily addresses interactive editing and layout control rather than long-form narrative consistency. The system focuses on maintaining subject identity within short interactive sessions and does not explicitly model persistent environments or object states across a structured story. As a result, the framework does not address challenges such as maintaining stable environments when scenes reappear or ensuring that object states evolve logically according to narrative events. Similarly, TheaterGen (Cheng et al., 2024) introduces a framework for multi-turn image generation in which a large language model acts as a “screenwriter” that generates a structured prompt book describing characters and layouts. Character prompts are used to generate reference images during a rehearsal stage, and these references guide the final image generation during the diffusion process. The key idea in TheaterGen is character management through prompt planning, which improves semantic consistency in multi-turn generation tasks. However, TheaterGen primarily focuses on character-level consistency, and its architecture generates subjects individually before merging them into the final image. This design can lead to unnatural interactions between characters or inconsistencies in spatial relationships. Moreover, the framework does not maintain persistent representations of environments or objects across a story timeline. Compared to these approaches, CANVAS focuses on story-level coherence rather than interactive editing, introducing explicit mechanisms to maintain background continuity, object persistence, and logical state transitions across narrative events. 

A.4.3. Memory-Based Narrative Generation 

Several recent works attempt to address long-range consistency using memory mechanisms. StoryMem (Zhang et al., 2025a) reformulates visual storytelling as iterative shot synthesis conditioned on a memory bank of keyframes from previously generated shots. The framework injects these keyframes into a single-shot video diffusion model using a Memory-to-Video architecture, enabling the model to preserve visual context across shots. StoryMem improves cross-shot consistency by storing selected keyframes and using them as conditioning signals during generation. However, the stored memory 

> 21 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

primarily functions as visual context for conditioning, rather than as an explicit representation of narrative entities. The system does not separately model characters, environments, and objects or reason about how these entities evolve across the story. As a result, the memory acts as a passive reference rather than an interpretable narrative representation. Very recently, VideoMemory (Zhou et al., 2026) introduces an entity-centric dynamic memory bank that stores representations of characters, props, and backgrounds. A multi-agent system retrieves these representations before generating each shot and updates the memory after generation.This architecture improves long-range entity consistency by maintaining persistent visual descriptors of story entities. Nevertheless, VideoMemory primarily focuses on video-level entity persistence rather than storyboard-level reasoning about scene structure. The system retrieves stored representations but does not explicitly plan narrative continuity or enforce constraints such as maintaining stable environment geometry across recurring scenes. Furthermore, generation remains largely conditioned on visual descriptors rather than structured narrative reasoning. Against Narrative Weaver (Yao et al., 2026) and OneStory (An et al., 2025), HoloCine (Meng et al., 2025) which bake long-range context or planning into the generator, CANVAS’s advantage is its architecture-agnostic, training-free deployment. However, these training-based methods report strong long-range coherence and could serve as upper-bound references. 

Comparison Criteria. We compare methods along several dimensions capturing the key require-ments of coherent visual storytelling in Table 13. 

Generation Paradigm. The primary architectural strategy used by the method to generate story images, such as autoregressive generation, attention-based consistency mechanisms, layout-guided generation, memory-conditioned generation, or explicit world-state modeling. 

Character Consistency. Whether the method explicitly preserves the visual identity of characters (e.g., face, clothing, body appearance) across multiple frames or shots. 

Environment Persistence. Whether the method ensures that recurring locations maintain stable spatial structure and visual layout when the scene reappears later in the story. 

Object State Tracking. Whether the system maintains and updates the state of narrative objects (e.g., a broken display case, a stolen artifact) across frames according to the story events. 

Interactive Editing. Whether the system supports multi-turn interaction where users iteratively modify previously generated images through dialogue or instructions. 

Explicit Narrative Modeling. Whether the framework maintains an explicit representation of the evolving narrative world (e.g., characters, environments, and object states) rather than relying only on visual similarity between generated frames. 

Long-Range Continuity. Whether the method can maintain consistency across distant frames or shots in long narratives where characters, environments, or objects reappear after several intermediate scenes. 

A.5. Human Evaluation Setup 

While automatic metrics can measure certain aspects of visual similarity and prompt alignment, they often fail to capture more subtle narrative properties such as scene continuity, object persistence, and overall perceptual coherence across a storyboard. Therefore, we conduct a human evaluation study to assess whether generated storyboards preserve consistent environments, object states, and narrative 

> 22 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

structure from the perspective of human observers. 

Annotators. We have asked fifteen annotators , consisting of members of our research group who have prior experience evaluating outputs of generative models. Participation in the study was voluntary. Before the study begins, we provide them with detailed guidelines and example evaluations to ensure consistent interpretation of the evaluation criteria (Instructions in Section A.6 and their interface is in Figure 8). The annotators were blinded to the method identity and the order of sequences was randomized per trial. 

A.6. Human Annotation Instructions. 

In this study, annotators compare two storyboard sequences generated by different methods (denoted as Scene A and Scene B ) as shown in Figure 8. Each storyboard contains a sequence of keyframes depicting the same narrative. The goal of the evaluation is to determine which method better preserves visual and narrative consistency. Please note that this is completely a voluntary help, and you can opt out if you do not want to help. All the data will be used for research purposes. For each comparison, annotators are shown the full storyboard sequences for both methods. However, the evaluation focuses on a specific target scene (e.g., Scene 4). The remaining scenes are provided only as context for judging continuity. Annotators must select one of the following options for each question: 

• Scene A : Scene A performs better according to the criterion. 

• Scene B : Scene B performs better according to the criterion. 

• Tie : Both scenes perform equally well. Annotators should evaluate only the target scene while using earlier scenes to assess consistency. 

Background Consistency. This criterion evaluates whether the environment or location remains visually consistent with earlier scenes. Annotators should check whether the scene maintains consistent spatial layout, stable environmental structure, persistent background elements (e.g., walls, windows, control panels, furniture), consistent lighting and overall scene configuration If the story revisits a previously seen location, the environment should maintain the same overall layout and structure. Major changes such as disappearing walls, altered room geometry, or entirely different environments indicate poor background consistency. Annotators should select the scene that better preserves the visual structure of the location across shots. 

Prop Consistency. This criterion evaluates whether important objects (props) maintain the correct presence and state throughout the story. Props include narrative-relevant objects such as tools, artifacts, equipment, documents, or other objects that appear repeatedly in the scene. Annotators should verify that: 

• objects that appear earlier remain present unless explicitly removed 

• objects that were removed or stolen do not reappear 

• objects maintain consistent visual appearance 

> 23 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Examples of inconsistencies include objects suddenly disappearing, reappearing after being removed, or changing form without narrative justification. Annotators should select the scene that better preserves the correct object states. 

Character Consistency. This criterion evaluates whether character identity and appearance 

remain consistent across scenes. Annotators should examine whether characters maintain: consistent facial identity, stable hairstyle and facial features, consistent clothing and accessories, consistent body appearance Changes in appearance are acceptable only if they are explicitly described by the narrative (e.g., a character changing clothes). Otherwise, unexpected appearance changes should be considered inconsistencies. Annotators should select the scene that better preserves character identity. 

Overall Preference. This criterion measures the overall quality of the target scene, considering all aspects of visual storytelling. Annotators should consider: 

• alignment with the scene description 

• character identity preservation 

• background continuity 

• object state correctness 

• overall realism and coherence Annotators should select the scene that provides the best overall visual depiction of the story. 

Annotation Guidelines. When performing the evaluation, annotators should follow these guidelines: 

• Evaluate only the target scene indicated in the interface. 

• Use the rest of the storyboard only to judge continuity. 

• Focus on major inconsistencies rather than minor stylistic differences. 

• Select Tie if both scenes are equally consistent. 

A.7. ContinuityEval Validation 

To verify that automated evaluations align with human judgments, we collect expert annotations from three evaluators experienced in image generation and visual evaluation. Annotators independently score storyboard frame pairs using the same rubrics as the autoraters, achieving an average inter-annotator agreement of 0.74 Fleiss’ Kappa .We then evaluate three multimodal models— Gemini-2.5-Flash , Gemini-CT , and GPT-5 —using identical prompts. Pearson correlations between human and model scores are computed on 100 randomly sampled storyboard transitions from ViStoryBench and ST-Bench. As shown in Table 14, au-tomated evaluators exhibit strong agreement with human judgments across all continuity dimensions, with Gemini-2.5-Flash achieving the highest correlation. Multi-shot storyboards require models to maintain a coherent visual world across camera cuts. However, generative models often introduce inconsistencies such as characters changing appearance, 

> 24 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

scene layouts shifting, or objects appearing and disappearing across shots. To obtain detailed and scalable measurements of narrative visual coherence, we design a ContinuityEval-based evaluation framework that provides fine-grained judgments of character and background consistency across generated storyboard sequences. The autorater evaluates each storyboard and assigns scores on a 1–5 Likert scale , where 1 indicates severe inconsistency and 5 indicates perfect continuity. ContinuityEval measures visual coherence through several structured dimensions. 

[1] Character Consistency ( CharCons ). Characters are the central entities of most narratives, and maintaining stable identity across shots is critical for visual storytelling. We therefore evaluate whether characters preserve consistent identity cues when they reappear in different frames. This dimension is decomposed into three components: Facial Consistency ( FaceCons ), which measures whether facial structure and identity remain stable; Clothing Consistency ( ClothCons ), which evaluates whether clothing attributes persist across shots; and Body Appearance Consistency ( BodyCons ),which captures body-level cues such as hairstyle, body shape, and other global appearance attributes. 

[2] Non-Movable Object Consistency ( GeomCons ). Even when characters remain consistent, storyboard frames may violate the physical structure of the environment—for example, walls, windows, or pillars may suddenly appear or disappear between shots. To capture such spatial errors, we evaluate whether the non-movable architectural elements of the environment remain geometrically coherent across shots . The prompt identifies structural elements such as walls, doors, windows, and pillars in both frames and detects violations including newly appearing structures, disappearing structures, or elements shifting to physically implausible positions without a plausible camera shift. A geometry consistency percentage is computed based on the number of such violations relative to the total number of architectural elements and is converted into a 1–5 score. 

[3] Movable Object Consistency ( PropCons ). Storyboard continuity also requires maintaining the identity and placement of movable objects within the scene. Generative models often introduce inconsistencies where props suddenly appear, disappear, or change across shots. To measure this effect, we evaluate whether movable objects (props) remain consistent across frames without sudden appearance or disappearance that cannot be explained by a plausible camera shift . The prompt identifies visible props in both frames and determines which objects can be correctly matched based on identical shape, color, and texture. A prop recoverability percentage is computed based on how many props can be matched across frames, and this percentage is converted into a 1–5 PropCons score. 

A.8. Storyboard Quality on Video Generation 

While recent text-to-video systems have made significant progress in generating short clips, producing long-form videos that remain faithful to the intended narrative remains challenging. In practice, many pipelines rely on storyboard-based generation , where an image or keyframe guides the initialization of each video segment. However, the quality of these keyframes directly affects the coherence and consistency of the resulting video. If the storyboard fails to preserve character identity, scene layout, or object states across shots, the downstream image-to-video model may amplify these inconsistencies, leading to narrative drift, identity changes, and visually incoherent sequences. To study the effect of storyboard quality on downstream video generation, we compare different storyboard generation methods by using their keyframes to seed the same image-to-video model. Specifically, we use the Veo-3.1-preview image-to-video model to generate short clips conditioned on the first keyframe produced by each method. All systems use identical prompts , ensuring that the only varying factor is the storyboard initialization. The generated clips are concatenated to produce videos of approximately 1.5 minutes, allowing us to evaluate long-range narrative continuity. 

> 25 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Figure 8 | Streamlit-Based Interface to Collect Human Preference on the Stories (Shown Side-by-Side) Generated by CANVAS and Other Baselines. Table 17 reports results across eight cinematic evaluation metrics proposed by FilMaster (Huang et al., 2025), with Gemini-2.5-Flash acting as the automatic judge. The results demonstrate that storyboard generation plays a critical role in determining final video quality. Methods that fail to preserve character identity or scene structure lead to reduced narrative coherence and character consistency in the generated videos. In contrast, CANVAS significantly improves performance across most metrics, achieving the highest overall score and showing particularly strong gains in narrative coherence, character consistency, cinematic techniques, and compelling storytelling. These results highlight the importance of continuity-aware storyboard generation for producing coherent long-form videos. 

A.9. Prompts and Implementation Details for CANVAS 

> 26 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Shot 1. Inside a warmly lit wooden workshop at the North Pole, Santa Claus—an elderly man with a white beard and red suit—sits at a sturdy table writing names in a large leather-bound book. Toys and tools fill the background. 

Shot 2. Close-up of Santa gently polishing a small wooden toy train, smiling as he tests its wheels in the cozy workshop environment. 

(a) CANVAS (w/ BackgroundPlanning) (b) CANVAS (w/ Background Planning) 

(c) CANVAS (w/o Background Planning) (d) CANVAS (w/o Background Planning) 

Figure 9 | Qualitative comparison of cross-shot continuity with and without background Planning. The first row shows outputs from CANVAS with structured planning , which performs location canonicalization and prop forecasting before shot generation. The second row shows results without background planning . While both depict the same narrative interaction, in the first shot, the fireplace remains occluded and also the toy was present at the background. Hence, the next shot just looks like a zoomed-in version of Santa, maintaining higher narrative continuity. 

> 27

CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Background Architecture Consistency Evaluation Prompt. 

You are an expert evaluator for cinematic storyboard continuity. You are given **two consecutive storyboard frames from the same scene in a narrative sequence**. Your task is to evaluate **Background Geometry Consistency (GeomCons)** between the two frames. GeomCons measures whether the **architectural structure of the environment remains logically coherent across shots**. Your evaluation must focus **only on architectural elements** and determine whether the spatial layout of the environment remains consistent between the two frames. —Important Instructions Do **NOT** evaluate the following: - characters - character pose or movement - facial expression - lighting differences - color shifts - camera blur - small objects or movable props - decorations These elements are **irrelevant to this evaluation**. Your focus must be **only architectural elements that define the physical structure of the environment**. —Definition of Architectural Elements Architectural elements are **fixed structural components of the environment** that define the geometry of the scene. Examples include: - walls - doorways - doors - windows - pillars - columns - arches - staircases - floors - ceilings - railings - architectural partitions - built-in counters - permanent architectural installations These elements define the **structural layout and geometry of the environment**. Do **NOT** include movable objects such as chairs, books, tools, decorations, or equipment. —Step 1 — Identify Architectural Elements in Frame A Inspect **Frame A** (the earlier frame). List all architectural elements visible in the scene. Examples: - left wall - right wall - doorway - window - pillar - staircase - railing - floor boundary - ceiling beam Let the number of architectural elements be: —Step 2 — Identify Architectural Elements in Frame B Inspect **Frame B** (the later frame). List all architectural elements visible in the scene. Let the number of elements be: —Step 3 — Match Corresponding Architectural Elements Match architectural elements that appear in **both frames**. Example: | Frame A | Frame B | |——–|——–| | left wall | left wall | | doorway | doorway | | pillar | pillar | Let the number of matched elements be: —Step 4 — Detect Structural Violations Evaluate the following violations. —Appearance Violations Architectural elements appearing in Frame B that were **not visible or implied in Frame A**. Count the number of such cases: —Disappearance Violations Architectural elements visible in Frame A that **disappear in Frame B** without plausible explanation. Count the number of such cases: —Layout Violations Architectural elements that **shift position or orientation in physically impossible ways**. Count the number of such cases: —Step 5 — Evaluate Camera Motion Plausibility Camera movement may explain some changes. Acceptable explanations include: - camera pan - camera zoom - camera reframing - camera moving closer - camera moving sideways If the change **cannot be explained by camera motion**, it should be counted as a violation. —Geometry Consistency Percentage First compute the total number of violations: Total Violations = 𝑁 𝑎 𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑟 + 𝑁 𝑑 𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑟 + 𝑁 𝑙 𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑢𝑡 

Normalize by the total number of architectural elements: Max Elements = max( 𝑁 𝐴 , 𝑁 𝐵 )Compute the **Geometry Consistency Percentage**: GeomCons = 100 × (1 minus Total Violations / Max Elements) Clamp the result between **0 and 100**. — Score Conversion (Percentage → Rubric) Convert the percentage to a **GeomCons score from 1–5**. | Percentage Range | Score | Interpretation | |——————|——|—————-| | **90–100%** | 5 | Perfect architectural consistency | | **75–89%** | 4 | Minor geometric differences | | **55–74%** | 3 | Moderate inconsistencies | | **30–54%** | 2 | Major structural inconsistencies | | **0–29%** | 1 | Severe spatial inconsistency | 

Table 9 | Prompt for Background Geometry Consistency Evaluation (In Consecutive and Non-Consecutive Shots). 

28 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Component Description 

Evaluation Goal Evaluate Prop Consistency (PropCons) between two storyboard frames by measuring how many props visible in one frame can be correctly recovered in the other frame with identical visual identity. Evaluation Scope The evaluation must rely only on visually observable information . Ob-jects that are not visible in one of the frames must not be considered. Visible Prop Con-straint If a prop is hidden due to camera angle, cropping, or occlusion, it must not be assumed to exist in the other frame. Only props that are clearly visible in both frames can be evaluated. Matching Criteria Two props are considered identical only if the following attributes match: shape, color, and texture/material appearance. Ignored Factors The evaluation ignores character identity, character motion, lighting dif-ferences, motion blur, and architectural structures. Definition of Props Props are movable non-structural objects present in the scene. Examples include chairs, tables, lamps, books, tools, decorations, statues, paintings, containers, and equipment. Excluded Objects Structural elements such as walls, doors, windows, floors, pillars, and architectural structures must not be included in the prop evaluation. Step 1 Identify all props clearly visible in Frame A. Let the number of visible props be 𝑁 𝐴 .Step 2 Identify all props clearly visible in Frame B. Let the number of visible props be 𝑁 𝐵 .Step 3 Determine which props can be correctly matched across both frames. A prop is considered recoverable only if its shape, color, and texture are identical in both frames. Let the number of matched props be 𝑁 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ .Step 4 Compute prop recoverability using the smaller visible prop set:  

> 𝑅𝑒 𝑓 𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑠

= min (𝑁 𝐴 , 𝑁 𝐵 ) 

> 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡 𝑦

= 100 × 𝑁 𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 

> 𝑅𝑒 𝑓 𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑠

Clamp the value between 0 and 100. 

Table 10 | Prop Consistency (PropCons) evaluation protocol used in ContinuityEval. The evaluator measures the recoverability of movable scene props between two frames based strictly on visible object identity. 

Hair and Body Appearance Evaluation Prompt. 

You are given two storyboard frames containing the same character. Evaluate whether the character’s hairstyle and body-level appearance are consistent. Compare the following attributes: hairstyle, hair length, hair color, hair texture, body silhouette or build, and wearable accessories such as glasses, hats, helmets, or backpacks. Ignore differences caused by body pose, camera viewpoint, or partial occlusion. Assign a score using the following rules: 5 — Hairstyle, hair color, body silhouette, and accessories are identical. 4 — Hairstyle and body silhouette are identical, with only minor accessory or lighting differences. 3 — Either hairstyle or body silhouette matches, but the other differs. 2 — Both hairstyle and body silhouette differ but one accessory matches. 1 — Hairstyle, body silhouette, and accessories are all different. Table 11 | Prompt used for Calculating HairStyle and Body Cues Consistency. 

> 29

CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Dataset Method Background Consistency Props Character Char Avg Consecutive Non-Consecutive PropCons FaceCons ClothCons BodyCons ViStoryBench AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 3.42 3.68 3.51 3.70 3.50 3.80 3.67 (Zhuang et al., 2025) Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) 3.66 3.85 3.60 3.80 3.60 3.90 3.77 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) 3.20 3.43 3.18 3.60 3.40 3.60 3.53 Gemini-CT (Comanici et al., 2025) 4.52 4.00 4.56 4.05 4.12 3.98 4.05 CANVAS w/o QA 4.79 4.78 4.84 4.12 4.30 4.01 4.14 

CANVAS (Ours) 4.83 4.83 4.88 4.25 4.52 4.12 4.30 

ST-Bench AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 3.33 3.58 3.38 3.60 3.40 3.70 3.57 (Zhang et al., 2025a) Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) 3.70 3.85 3.78 3.80 3.60 3.90 3.77 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) 3.22 3.50 2.89 3.70 3.50 3.80 3.67 Gemini-CT (Comanici et al., 2025) 4.62 3.99 4.41 4.05 3.92 3.98 3.98 CANVAS w/o QA 4.89 4.70 4.69 4.08 4.24 3.98 4.10 

CANVAS (Ours) 4.94 4.73 4.73 4.18 4.45 4.08 4.24 

HardContinuity AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 3.05 3.18 2.90 3.90 3.05 3.30 3.42 Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) 3.65 3.65 2.56 4.78 3.81 4.27 4.29 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) 3.33 3.33 2.23 4.39 3.78 4.02 4.06 Gemini-CT (Comanici et al., 2025) 4.48 3.83 4.06 4.63 4.27 4.27 4.39 CANVAS w/o QA 4.84 4.83 4.16 4.72 4.61 4.55 4.63 

CANVAS (Ours) 4.88 4.88 4.19 4.95 4.91 4.87 4.91 

Table 12 | Comparison of storyboard generation systems under the ContinuityEval framework using gemini-2.5-Flash as Judge. Background consistency is reported separately for consecutive shot transitions and non-consecutive scene reappearances. PropCons measures identity consistency of movable objects. Character continuity evaluates identity preservation using facial appearance, clothing attributes, and hair/body cues. The final column reports the average character consistency . We additionally report CANVAS w/o QA , which removes the candidate verification module. Even without QA-based selection, CANVAS remains competitive with or stronger than prior baselines, indicating that the gains largely arise from the continuity planning and memory mechanisms. 

Method Generation Paradigm CharacterCons Environment Object State Tracking Interactive Editing Explicit Narrative Long-Range 

StoryGen Autoregressive diffusion ✓ 7 7 7 7 7

StoryDiffusion Attention-based diffusion consistency ✓ 7 7 7 7 7

AutoStory Layout-guided story generation ✓ △ 7 7 7 7

Story2Board Training-free storyboard prompting ✓ △ 7 7 7 7

Story-Iter Iterative reference refinement ✓ △ 7 7 7 ✓

TheaterGen LLM prompt-book + diffusion ✓ 7 7 ✓ 7 7

AutoStudio Multi-agent interactive generation ✓ △ 7 ✓ 7 △

StoryMem Keyframe memory conditioning ✓ △ △ 7 7 ✓

VideoMemory Entity-centric memory bank ✓ △ △ 7 7 △

CANVAS (Ours) World-state narrative modeling ✓ ✓ ✓ 7 ✓ ✓

Table 13 | Positioning of CANVAS relative to prior visual storytelling and multi-turn image generation frameworks. Most existing approaches enforce consistency through reference images or attention mechanisms, focusing primarily on character identity. In contrast, CANVAS explicitly models the evolving narrative world state , maintaining persistent representations of characters, environments, and object states across shots to enable long-range story continuity. △ indicates partial or implicit support. 

Model Background Character Props Gemini-2.5-Flash 0.71 0.68 0.67 Gemini-3-Pro-Image 0.65 0.61 0.62 GPT-5 0.70 0.66 0.68 

Table 14 | Pearson correlation between human expert ratings and VLM-based autoraters across three evaluation dimensions. Scores are computed on 50 randomly sampled storyboard transitions from ViStoryBench and ST-Bench. 

30 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding                                             

> Method Background Consistency Props Character Consistency Char Avg Consec Non-Consec PropCons FaceCons ClothCons BodyCons AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) 3.28 3.48 3.36 3.58 3.38 3.68 3.55 Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) 3.58 3.73 3.48 3.78 3.52 3.82 3.71 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) 3.12 3.32 3.02 3.50 3.28 3.52 3.43 Gemini-CT (Comanici et al., 2025) 4.30 3.80 4.20 3.92 3.67 3.88 3.82
> CANVAS (Ours) 4.60 4.60 4.52 4.11 4.39 4.02 4.18

Table 15 | ContinuityEval results using GPT-5 as the judge (To avoid the risk of circularity/bias of generation and evaluation using same model). Using GPT-5 as an independent evaluator, CANVAS consistently improves continuity across all dimensions compared to the strongest baseline (Gemini-CT). Background continuity improves from 4.30 → 4.60 (+7.0%) for consecutive scenes and from 3.80 →

4.60 (+21.1%) for non-consecutive scene reappearances, indicating substantially stronger long-range environment consistency. Prop persistence also improves from 4.20 → 4.52 (+7.6%), suggesting that CANVAS better maintains object states across shots. Character consistency also improves substantially, with the average character score increasing from 3.82 → 4.18 (+9.4%), indicating more stable identity preservation across shots. Overall, the results show that CANVAS provides the largest gains in non-consecutive background consistency, highlighting its ability to maintain coherent environments across distant shots—one of the most challenging aspects of long-range visual storytelling. 

Method CSD ↑ CIDS ↑ Prompt Alignment (PA) ↑ CM ↑ Inc ↑ Aes ↑ CP ↑

Cross Self Cross Self Scene Shot CI IA Avg Story-Iter 0.48 0.67 0.60 0.71 3.50 3.67 3.31 3.11 3.39 57.34 14.33 4.55 0.30 Story2Board 0.23 0.45 0.35 0.39 3.12 2.34 3.0 3.23 2.92 44.44 11.93 4.56 0.24 AutoStudio 0.34 0.63 0.44 0.46 3.34 3.55 3.56 3.11 3.39 56.22 14.34 3.45 0.235 Gemini-CT 0.38 0.62 0.58 0.65 3.46 3.82 3.96 3.20 3.61 59.97 12.50 5.54 0.244 

CANVAS 0.49 0.72 0.61 0.71 3.50 3.75 3.23 3.9 3.60 60.34 14.89 5.60 0.312 

Table 16 | Comparison on ViStoryBench-Lite across story-image and multimodal generation methods. Metrics include Cross-Shot Diversity (CSD), Cross-Image Dependency Score (CIDS), Prompt Alignment (PA), Consistency Metric (CM), Inconsistency (Inc), Aesthetic score (Aes), and Character Preservation (CP). Gemini-CTo results are taken directly from the benchmark evaluation, and CANVAS uses the same evaluation protocol.                                                       

> Method SF NC VQ CC PLC CT CD OQ Avg
> StoryIter (Mao et al., 2026) + Veo-3.1 3.20 2.60 3.40 1.80 4.40 2.80 4.00 2.80 3.13 AutoStudio (Cheng et al., 2025) + Veo-3.1 3.00 2.80 3.20 2.00 3.50 3.00 3.50 3.20 3.03 Gemini-CT (Zhang et al., 2025a) + Veo-3.1 3.00 2.20 3.60 2.20 3.80 3.60 3.80 4.40 3.33 Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) + Veo-3.1 3.60 2.20 1.80 1.00 3.60 2.20 3.40 3.20 2.63 CANVAS (Ours) + Veo-3.1 3.40 4.00 3.80 4.00 3.80 4.00 4.40 4.80 4.03

Table 17 | Comparison of the videos generated by each of the baselines and CANVAS paired with a standard I2V model across eight evaluation metrics proposed by FilMaster (Huang et al., 2025) using Gemini-2.5-Flash as the judge. We evaluate videos generated using the Veo-3.1-preview Image-to-Video (I2V) model, where the first frame is initialized with the keyframe produced by each storyboard generation baseline. To ensure fair comparison, we keep the video prompt identical across methods, varying only the keyframe input. Each prompt–keyframe pair is used to generate short clips, which are then concatenated to produce a final video of approximately 1.5 minutes. Metrics are abbreviated as follows: SF (Script Faithfulness), NC (Narrative Coherence), VQ (Visual Quality), CC 

(Character Consistency), PLC (Physical Law Compliance), CT (Cinematic Techniques), CD (Compelling Degree), and OQ (Overall Quality). CANVAS achieves the strongest overall performance, particularly in narrative coherence, character consistency, cinematic techniques, and compelling storytelling, demonstrating the benefits of continuity-aware generation that maintains consistent characters, environments, and object states across shots. 

31 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Method SF NC VQ CC PL CT CD OQ Story2Board (Dinkevich et al., 2025) + Veo-3.1 2.25 1.75 1.75 1.00 3.00 2.75 2.75 2.25 Story-Iter (Mao et al., 2026) + Veo-3.1 3.75 2.25 3.75 2.00 3.75 4.50 4.25 4.25 Gemini-CT + + Veo-3.1 3.75 2.25 4.25 2.50 3.50 4.25 4.00 4.00 CANVAS (Ours) + Veo-3.1 4.00 3.00 4.75 4.00 3.25 5.00 4.75 4.75 

Table 18 | Comparison of the videos generated by each of the baselines and CANVAS paired with a standard I2V model across eight evaluation metrics proposed by FilMaster (Huang et al., 2025) using Gemini-2.5-Pro as the judge. We evaluate videos generated using the Veo-3.1-preview Image-to-Video (I2V) model, where the first frame is initialized with the keyframe produced by each storyboard generation baseline. To ensure fair comparison, we keep the video prompt identical across methods, varying only the keyframe input. Each prompt–keyframe pair is used to generate short clips, which are then concatenated to produce a final video of approximately 1.5 minutes. Metrics are abbreviated as follows: SF (Script Faithfulness), NC (Narrative Coherence), VQ (Visual Quality), CC 

(Character Consistency), PLC (Physical Law Compliance), CT (Cinematic Techniques), CD (Compelling Degree), and OQ (Overall Quality). CANVAS achieves the strongest overall performance, particularly in narrative coherence, character consistency, cinematic techniques, and compelling storytelling, demonstrating the benefits of continuity-aware generation that maintains consistent characters, environments, and object states across shots. 

Method Model CSD ↑ CIDS ↑ PA ↑ CM ↑ Inc ↑ Aes ↑ CP Cross Self Cross Self Scene Shot CI IA Avg. Copy-Paste Baseline - 0.735 0.770 0.911 0.993 0.62 2.08 0.87 1.55 1.28 92.76 5.46 4.39 0.550 

Story Image Method 

StoryGen (Liu et al., 2024) SD1.5 0.405 0.562 0.405 0.591 1.05 2.32 1.43 1.75 1.64 52.98 7.15 4.09 0.277 StoryGen (Liu et al., 2024) SD1.5 0.396 0.551 0.396 0.602 1.18 2.25 1.49 1.50 1.60 52.53 7.67 4.09 0.224 StoryGen (Liu et al., 2024) SD1.5 0.316 0.617 0.316 0.610 0.89 2.41 1.39 2.05 1.68 40.13 6.25 3.86 0.240 TheaterGen (Cheng et al., 2024) SD1.5 0.221 0.411 0.354 0.537 2.85 1.94 1.02 1.15 1.74 54.93 13.60 4.94 0.204 StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024) SDXL 0.293 0.680 0.409 0.641 3.21 3.00 1.92 1.95 2.52 67.07 12.99 5.83 0.186 StoryDiffusion (Zhou et al., 2024) SDXL 0.409 0.611 0.460 0.575 1.91 3.41 2.64 2.75 2.68 62.48 8.18 5.21 0.251 SEED-Story (Yang et al., 2024) SDXL 0.258 0.763 0.559 0.656 2.17 1.93 1.49 2.89 1.87 64.33 4.90 3.81 0.306 Story-Adapter (Mao et al., 2026) SD1.5 0.518 0.609 0.490 0.605 1.91 3.44 2.56 2.70 2.65 70.34 11.49 4.89 0.250 Story-Adapter (Mao et al., 2026) SD1.5 0.371 0.758 0.425 0.619 1.80 3.20 2.38 2.30 2.42 61.39 12.03 4.80 0.217 Story-Adapter (Mao et al., 2026) SD1.5 0.343 0.515 0.430 0.547 1.97 3.42 2.74 2.65 2.69 65.32 12.72 5.12 0.203 Story-Adapter (Mao et al., 2026) SD1.5 0.353 0.752 0.416 0.634 1.85 3.23 2.48 2.30 2.46 61.57 10.59 4.85 0.220 UNO ( ?) FLUX1 0.425 0.648 0.512 0.630 3.54 2.98 3.54 2.55 3.06 70.88 10.50 5.13 0.287 OmniGen2 (Wu et al., 2025b) DiT 0.491 0.648 0.576 0.668 3.49 3.29 3.49 2.55 3.07 73.44 8.21 5.21 0.298 CharaConsist (Wang et al., 2025) FLUX1 0.333 0.646 0.347 0.539 3.69 3.61 2.86 2.21 3.09 62.10 10.84 5.78 0.216 QwenImageEdit-2509 (Wu et al., 2025a) DiT 0.404 0.614 0.482 0.541 3.89 3.53 3.89 2.60 3.25 61.27 10.56 5.46 0.249 

Multi-modal Large Model (Language, Image and Video) 

GPT-4o* - 0.481 0.680 0.420 0.522 3.649 3.781 3.907 2.684 3.505 69.33 9.02 5.49 0.209 Gemini-2.0* - 0.361 0.573 0.573 0.677 3.261 3.565 3.198 3.294 3.329 74.82 10.12 4.91 0.266 Gemini-2.5* - 0.447 0.657 0.553 0.642 3.319 3.709 3.991 3.250 3.567 64.86 10.54 5.61 0.255 Gemini-3.0 Pro* - 0.385 0.622 0.581 0.653 3.458 3.828 3.969 3.200 3.614 59.97 12.50 5.54 0.244 

Our Method 

CANVAS Gemini-3-pro 0.491 0.72 0.61 0.71 3.5 3.75 3.23 3.9 3.6 60.34 14.89 5.60 0.312 

Table 19 | Benchmark comparison across story image and multimodal large models on ViStoryBench-Lite (Zhuang et al., 2025). We copy the table from the paper to report numbers of the existing baselines (Only Story-Image and Open-source Models excluding the StoryVideo methods and Commercial Platforms) and compare CANVAS using the same evaluation suite released by the paper. 

32 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding AutoStudio 

> Story-Iter
> Gemini-CT
> CANVAS (Ours)
> Story2Board

Figure 10 | The figure compares storyboards generated by recent training-free methods—Story2Board, AutoStudio, Story-Iter, Gemini-CT—and CANVAS for a multi-shot narrative set across a robotics lab and hallway. Each row shows a method and each column shows a shot, illustrating how well character identity, environments, and object states are maintained across the sequence. Existing methods produce visually plausible frames but suffer from identity drift, layout inconsistencies, and unstable object states, especially when scenes reappear after transitions. In contrast, CANVAS preserves consistent character appearance, stable environments, and coherent object interactions throughout the narrative by using global continuity planning and world-state memory tracking. Overall, the figure shows that explicitly modeling characters, locations, and object states enables CANVAS to maintain strong long-range visual coherence across multi-shot storyboards. 

> 33 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Prompt: Location Clustering for Background Continuity 

You are a narrative continuity planner for visual storytelling. Your goal is to identify and cluster recurring locations across a sequence of storyboard shots. 

Instructions: 

1. Identify the physical environment in which each shot occurs. 2. Assign a unique location_id to each distinct location. 3. Cluster shots that occur in the same environment under the same location_id .4. If a shot returns to a previously seen environment, mark it as location_reappearance .5. If a shot directly continues the previous scene without changing environment, mark it as 

previous_frame_continuation .6. If the location appears for the first time, mark it as fresh_location .

Return STRICT JSON in the following format: 

{"locations": { "museum_gallery": [ "Scene_1_Shot_1", "Scene_1_Shot_2", "Scene_3_Shot_1" ], "security_room": [ "Scene_2_Shot_1" ]}, "shots": { "Scene_1_Shot_1": { "location_id": "museum_gallery", "continuity_mode": "fresh_location" }}}

Constraints 

• Maintain consistent location identities across shots. 

• Do not create duplicate location IDs for the same environment. 

• When a location reappears later in the story, reuse the original location_id .Table 20 | Prompt used for clustering shots into recurring locations to maintain background continuity across the storyboard. 

> 34 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Prompt: Future Prop and Geometry Aware Background Planning 

You are a story continuity planner responsible for maintaining consistent environments across storyboard shots. Your task is to reason about how the background scene should evolve based on the current and future states of important props and architectural geometry of the background location. 

Instructions 

Given: 

• The description of the current shot. 

• The planned metadata for the shot (characters, location, prop states). 

• The previously known world state of props and environments. Plan the background scene so that it remains logically consistent with both the current story state and upcoming events. 

Reason about the following: 

1. Which props should remain visible in the background environment. 2. Which props should disappear because they were taken, destroyed, or moved. 3. Which props are likely to appear in the background due to upcoming story events. 4. Which props are currently carried by characters and therefore should not remain in the environment. 5. Which environmental objects must persist across shots to maintain scene identity (e.g., furniture, structures, display cases). 6. Whether the camera framing hides some props even though they still exist in the environment. 

Return STRICT JSON in the following format: 

{"background_props": ["display_case", "museum_sign", "security_camera" ], "must_appear": ["golden_artifact" ], "must_not_appear": ["artifact_case_glass" ], "carried_props": {"thief": ["golden_artifact"] }, "reasoning": "The artifact is carried away by the thief, so it should not remain in the gallery background. The broken display case should remain visible." }

Constraints 

• Background elements should remain consistent with previously established environments. 

• If a prop was present earlier in the same location and nothing removed it, it should persist. 

• Props carried by characters must not remain in the background. 

• The planned background should support future story events. 

Table 21 | Prompt used for future prop-aware background planning to ensure that scene environments evolve consistently with object state transitions. 

> 35 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Prompt: Character Appearance State Planning (Single Character) 

You are a narrative continuity planner responsible for tracking the visual appearance of a single character across a sequence of storyboard shots. Your goal is to determine the appearance state of the character in each shot and ensure that the appearance evolves consistently with the story. 

Input 

• The name of the target character. 

• A sequence of storyboard shot descriptions. 

Instructions 

1. For each shot, determine whether the target character appears in the scene. 2. If the character appears, determine the character’s visual appearance state (e.g., clothing, uniform, disguise). 3. If the appearance does not change, reuse the same appearance state identifier as the previous shot. 4. If the story explicitly changes the character’s clothing or visual style, assign a new appear-ance state. 5. If the character does not appear in a shot, mark the state as not_present .

Return STRICT JSON in the following format: 

{"character": "Ethan", "appearance_timeline": { "Scene_1_Shot_1": "blue_curator_jacket", "Scene_1_Shot_2": "blue_curator_jacket", "Scene_1_Shot_3": "blue_curator_jacket", "Scene_2_Shot_1": "black_security_jacket", "Scene_2_Shot_2": "not_present", "Scene_3_Shot_1": "black_security_jacket" }}

Constraints 

• Maintain consistent appearance across shots unless the story explicitly indicates a change. 

• Reuse appearance identifiers whenever the clothing or visual style remains the same. 

• Ensure that later reappearances match the most recent appearance state. Table 22 | Prompt used during Character Appearance Planning. 

> 36 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Prompt: Prop State Update Planning (Single Object) 

You are a narrative continuity planner responsible for tracking the state of a single prop (object) across a sequence of storyboard shots. Your goal is to determine how the object’s state evolves throughout the story and ensure logical consistency with the described events. 

Input 

• The name of the target prop (object). 

• A sequence of storyboard shot descriptions. 

Instructions 

1. For each shot, determine whether the target prop appears in the scene. 2. If the prop appears, determine its state (e.g., intact, broken, inside container, carried by character, missing). 3. If the prop is carried by a character, record which character carries it. 4. If the prop is removed from the scene (e.g., stolen, destroyed, moved), update its state accordingly. 5. If the prop continues unchanged across shots, reuse the same state identifier. 6. If the prop does not appear in a shot but still exists in the story world, mark it as not_visible .

Return STRICT JSON in the following format: 

{"prop": "golden_artifact", "state_timeline": {"Scene_1_Shot_1": {"state": "inside_display_case", "carrier": null }, "Scene_1_Shot_2": {"state": "inside_display_case", "carrier": null }, "Scene_1_Shot_3": {"state": "carried", "carrier": "masked_thief" }, "Scene_2_Shot_1": {"state": "not_visible", "carrier": "masked_thief" }, "Scene_3_Shot_1": {"state": "missing_from_gallery", "carrier": "masked_thief" }}}

Constraints 

• Maintain consistent prop states across shots unless the story explicitly changes them. 

• If a prop is carried by a character, it should not remain in the previous location. 

• If a prop disappears from the environment, update its state to reflect the narrative event. 

• When the prop reappears later, ensure its state matches the last known world state. 

Table 23 | Prompt used during global planning to determine the state timeline for a single prop across shots. 

> 37

CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Prompt: Previous-Frame Continuation Decision 

You are a visual continuity planner for storyboard generation. Your task is to decide whether the current shot is a direct continuation of the previous shot, such that the previous frame should be reused as a visual anchor for generation. 

Input 

• The description of the previous shot. 

• The description of the current shot. 

• The location assignment of both shots. 

• The characters present in both shots. 

• The prop states in both shots. 

Instructions 

Determine whether the current shot should be treated as previous_frame_continuation , location_reappearance , or fresh_location .Mark the current shot as previous_frame_continuation only if the current shot depends on preserving the spatial structure of the immediately previous frame. Reason about the following: 1. Whether the previous shot and current shot occur in the same physical environment. 2. Whether the current shot is an immediate temporal continuation rather than a later revisit. 3. Whether the spatial arrangement of the scene should remain consistent across the cut. 4. Whether important background geometry must be preserved, such as walls, doors, furniture, display cases, tables, platforms, or room layout. 5. Whether character positions, object placements, or scene composition depend on the previous frame. 6. Whether the current shot is a close-up, zoom-in, alternate camera angle, or tighter crop of the same ongoing scene. 7. Whether there are state changes in the scene that still require maintaining the same base spatial environment. 

Use the following rules: 

• Choose previous_frame_continuation if the scene is still unfolding in the same environment and preserving the exact spatial setup from the previous frame is important. 

• Choose location_reappearance if the shot returns to a known location after an intervening scene or temporal gap, where the same location identity should be preserved but not necessarily the exact previous composition. 

• Choose fresh_location if the shot occurs in a new environment not previously shown. 

• Even if some props or characters change state, still choose previous_frame_continuation when the underlying scene geometry should remain continuous. 

Return STRICT JSON in the following format: 

{"continuity_mode": "previous_frame_continuation", "same_location": true, "requires_spatial_continuity": true, "spatial_dependencies": [ "display_case remains in same position", "same museum gallery layout", "artifact remains centered under spotlight" ], "reasoning": "..." }

Constraints 

• Base the decision on scene continuity, not only on shared characters or shared location name. 

• Prioritize whether preserving spatial arrangement from the immediately previous frame will improve visual continuity. 

• If the current shot is compositionally dependent on the previous frame, prefer previous_frame_continuation .

Table 24 | Prompt used to decide whether the current shot should reuse the previous frame as a continuation anchor. 

38 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Algorithm 2: Candidate Anchor Retrieval and Prompt Construction 

Input: Current shot 𝑠 𝑡 , previous frame 𝐼 𝑡 −1, global plan 𝑃 , character memory 𝑀 𝑐 , location memory 𝑀 𝑙 , prop memory 𝑀 𝑜 

Output: Candidate generation prompt Π𝑡 and anchor set A𝑡 

1. Initialize anchor set: 𝐴 𝑡 ← ∅ 

2. Retrieve shot plan from global planner: 

𝑝 𝑡 = 𝑃 (𝑠 𝑡 )

3. Continuation Reasoning 

Determine whether the current shot is a direct continuation of the previous shot. (a) If the planner determines that spatial dependencies from the previous frame must be preserved: i. Add most recent frame anchor: 

𝐴 𝑡 ← 𝐴 𝑡 ∪ { 𝐼 𝑡 −1 }

ii. Proceed to character anchor retrieval 4. Character Anchor Retrieval 

For each character 𝑐 appearing in shot 𝑠 𝑡 :(a) Retrieve appearance state from global plan: 

𝑘 = 𝐶 (𝑐, 𝑡 )

(b) If appearance state changed from the previous shot: i. Retrieve canonical anchor from canonical memory 

𝐼 𝑐 = 𝑀 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑐 (𝑐, 𝑘 )

(c) Else if appearance state remains unchanged: i. Retrieve most recent anchor for the character 

𝐼 𝑐 = 𝑀 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑐 (𝑐 )

ii. If no recent anchor exists: 

𝐼 𝑐 = 𝑀 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑐 (𝑐, 𝑘 )

(d) Add character anchor to anchor set: 

𝐴 𝑡 ← 𝐴 𝑡 ∪ { 𝐼 𝑐 }

5. Background Anchor Retrieval 

(a) Retrieve location identifier: 

ℓ = 𝐿 (𝑠 𝑡 )

(b) Use prop-state reasoning 𝑂 (𝑜, 𝑡 ) and background reasoning to determine which background anchor should be retrieved. (c) If location ℓ exists in location memory: i. Retrieve stored background anchor: 

𝐼 ℓ = 𝑀 𝑙 (ℓ)

ii. Add to anchor set: 

𝐴 𝑡 ← 𝐴 𝑡 ∪ { 𝐼 ℓ }

(d) Else (first occurrence of the location): i. No background anchor is retrieved ii. Scene will be generated using the shot description and prop reasoning 6. Prop Anchor Retrieval 

For each prop 𝑜 appearing in shot 𝑠 𝑡 :(a) Retrieve prop state from global plan: 

𝑠 = 𝑂 (𝑜, 𝑡 )

(b) If prop has appeared previously in the story: i. Retrieve stored prop anchor: 

𝐼 𝑜 = 𝑀 𝑜 (𝑜 )

ii. Add to anchor set: 

𝐴 𝑡 ← 𝐴 𝑡 ∪ { 𝐼 𝑜 }

7. Candidate Prompt Construction 

Construct the candidate generation prompt Π𝑡 using: (a) Shot description 𝑠 𝑡 

(b) Retrieved anchors A𝑡 

(c) Character appearance states 𝐶 (𝑐, 𝑡 )

(d) Prop states 𝑂 (𝑜, 𝑡 )

(e) Background reasoning from location plan 𝐿 (𝑠 𝑡 )

8. Return ( 𝐴 𝑡 , Π𝑡 )

39 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding 

Prompt: Candidate Frame Generation 

You are a cinematic storyboard generator. Your task is to generate a candidate frame for the current shot while maintaining visual continuity with previously generated frames and respecting the global story plan. 

Input 

• Shot description 𝑠 𝑡 

• Retrieved visual anchors A𝑡 (may include previous frame, character anchors, background anchors, and prop anchors) 

• Character appearance states from the global plan 

• Prop states and prop reasoning for the current shot 

• Location identifier and background reasoning 

Instructions 

Generate a visually coherent frame for the current shot by following these rules: 1. Respect the shot description 

Ensure the generated frame faithfully depicts the actions, characters, and environment described in the current shot. 2. Preserve character identity 

Characters must maintain the appearance state specified by the global plan. If character anchors are provided, match the visual identity (face, clothing, body appearance) shown in those anchors. 3. Maintain spatial continuity 

If the previous frame is provided as an anchor, treat the current shot as a continuation of the same scene. Preserve the spatial layout of the environment, including background structure, object placement, and character positions. 4. Use background anchors 

If background anchors are provided, maintain the same environment geometry (e.g., walls, furniture, display cases, room layout). 5. Respect prop states 

Ensure that props appear according to the planned prop states: 

• Props that must appear should be clearly visible. 

• Props carried by characters should move with the corresponding character. 

• Props that were removed, destroyed, or taken away should not remain in the environment. 6. Maintain cinematic coherence 

The frame should resemble a realistic cinematic shot with consistent lighting, perspective, and scene composition. 

Output 

Generate a high-quality candidate frame that satisfies the shot description and respects all provided anchors and continuity constraints. 

Table 25 | Prompt used to generate candidate storyboard frames using retrieved anchors and global continuity constraints. 

> 40 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Algorithm 3: VLM-Based QA Candidate Selection with Scoring Prompt 

Input: Shot 𝑠 𝑡 , candidate frames {𝐼 (1) 

> 𝑡

, ..., 𝐼 (𝑁 ) 

> 𝑡

}, global plan 𝑃 , previous frame 𝐼 𝑡 −1

Output: Best frame 𝐼 ∗

> 𝑡

1. Retrieve shot plan from global planner: 

𝑝 𝑡 = 𝑃 (𝑠 𝑡 )

2. Extract continuity constraints from the global plan: 

• Character appearance states 𝐶 (𝑐, 𝑡 )

• Location identity 𝐿 (𝑠 𝑡 )

• Prop states 𝑂 (𝑜, 𝑡 )

3. Construct the VLM evaluation prompt that includes: 

• Shot description 𝑠 𝑡 

• Character appearance states 𝐶 (𝑐, 𝑡 )

• Prop states 𝑂 (𝑜, 𝑡 )

• Location identifier 𝐿 (𝑠 𝑡 )

• Previous frame 𝐼 𝑡 −1 (if continuation) 4. Initialize scores: 

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑖 = 0 ∀𝑖 ∈ { 1, ..., 𝑁 }

5. Evaluate candidate frames 

For each candidate image 𝐼 (𝑖 ) 

> 𝑡

:(a) Provide the candidate image and the evaluation prompt to the VLM (b) The VLM evaluates the frame using the scoring rubric and returns: 

• Shot alignment score 

• Character consistency score 

• Background continuity score 

• Prop state correctness score (c) Compute the overall score: 

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑖 = 𝑆 𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛 + 𝑆 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟 + 𝑆 𝑏𝑔 + 𝑆 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑝 

4

6. Select best candidate: 

𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

= arg max  

> 𝑖

𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑖 

7. Return selected frame 𝐼 ∗

> 𝑡
> 41 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Prompt: VLM-Based Continuity Scoring Prompt 

You are a visual continuity evaluator. Your task is to evaluate a candidate storyboard frame and assign scores based on how well it satisfies the global continuity plan and the current shot description. 

Input 

• Current shot description 𝑠 𝑡 

• Candidate image 𝐼 𝑡 

• Character appearance states from the global plan 

• Prop states for the current shot 

• Location identifier for the scene 

• Previous frame 𝐼 𝑡 −1 (if continuation) 

Evaluation Criteria 

Evaluate the image along the following dimensions and assign a score from 1 to 5. 1. Shot Alignment (1–5) 

How well does the image depict the action described in the shot? 2. Character Appearance Consistency (1–5) 

Do characters match the planned appearance states? 3. Background Continuity (1–5) 

Does the environment match the planned location and maintain spatial continuity with the previous frame? 4. Prop State Correctness (1–5) 

Do props appear with the correct state according to the global plan? 

Return STRICT JSON 

{"shot_alignment": 5, "character_consistency": 4, "background_continuity": 5, "prop_state_correctness": 4, "overall_score": 4.5, "reasoning": "The frame correctly depicts the museum gallery..." }

Scoring Guidelines 

• 5 = perfect match with the plan 

• 4 = minor inconsistencies 

• 3 = moderate inconsistencies 

• 2 = major inconsistencies 

• 1 = completely incorrect 

Table 26 | Prompt used by the VLM to score candidate storyboard frames during QA-based candidate selection (Algorithm 3). 

> 42 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Algorithm 4: Visual Memory Update with Anchor Extraction 

Input: Selected frame 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

, shot description 𝑠 𝑡 , global plan P, memory M

Output: Updated memory M

1. Query the global plan to obtain: 

• Character appearance states C( 𝑐, 𝑡 )

• Location identity L( 𝑠 𝑡 )

• Object states O( 𝑜, 𝑡 )

2. Provide the selected frame 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

together with the shot description and entity descriptions to a VLM-based extractor (prompt in Table ?? ). 3. The VLM identifies visible entities and produces clean visual anchors: 

• Character anchors 

• Location/background anchor 

• Prop anchors 4. Update Character Memory 

For each detected character 𝑐 :

M𝑐 (𝑐, C( 𝑐, 𝑡 )) ← 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 𝑐 

where 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 𝑐 is the extracted character image representing the current appearance. 5. Update Location Memory 

Let 𝑙 = L( 𝑠 𝑡 ).

M𝑙 (𝑙 ) ← 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 𝑙 

where 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 𝑙 represents the updated visual environment of the location. 6. Update Prop Memory 

For each object 𝑜 appearing in the frame: 

M𝑜 (𝑜, O( 𝑜, 𝑡 )) ← 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 𝑜 

where 𝑎𝑛𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑟 𝑜 is the extracted visual anchor of the object in its current state. 7. Update Frame Memory 

Append the selected frame: 

M 𝑓 ← M 𝑓 ∪ { 𝐼 ∗ 

> 𝑡

}

8. Return updated memory M.

> 43 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Prompt: Character Anchor Extraction 

You are extracting visual anchors for characters from a storyboard frame. 

Input 

• Frame image 𝐼 𝑡 

• Shot description 𝑠 𝑡 

• Character appearance states C( 𝑐, 𝑡 )

Task 

Identify characters visible in the frame and extract a clean visual anchor image that captures their current appearance (face, clothing, hairstyle, and overall identity). 

Return STRICT JSON 

{"characters":[ {"name":"Ethan", "appearance_state":"trench_coat", "anchor":"character_anchor_image" }, {"name":"Lena", "appearance_state":"blue_dress", "anchor":"character_anchor_image" }]}

Guidelines 

• Extract anchors only for characters clearly visible. 

• Anchors should capture the full appearance identity. 

Table 27 | Prompt for extracting character appearance anchors for updating character memory. 

> 44 CANVAS: Continuity-Aware Narratives via Visual Agentic Storyboarding

Prompt: Location Background Anchor Extraction 

You are extracting the visual environment anchor for a location from a storyboard frame. 

Input 

• Frame image 𝐼 𝑡 

• Shot description 𝑠 𝑡 

• Location identity L( 𝑠 𝑡 )

Task 

Identify the environment corresponding to the location and extract a clean background anchor image that represents the spatial layout of the scene. 

Return STRICT JSON 

{"location":"museum_gallery", "anchor":"background_anchor_image" }

Guidelines 

• The anchor should capture the environment layout. 

• Avoid including large foreground characters when possible. 

Table 28 | Prompt for extracting background anchors associated with locations. 

Prompt: Prop Anchor Extraction 

You are extracting visual anchors for important objects from a storyboard frame. 

Input 

• Frame image 𝐼 𝑡 

• Shot description 𝑠 𝑡 

• Object state descriptions O( 𝑜, 𝑡 )

Task 

Identify objects that appear in the frame and extract visual anchors representing their current state. 

Return STRICT JSON 

{"objects":[ {"name":"golden_artifact", "state":"inside_display_case", "anchor":"prop_anchor_image" }]}

Guidelines 

• Extract anchors only for visible objects. 

• Ensure the object state matches the visual evidence. 

Table 29 | Prompt used to extract prop anchors and update object-state memory.