Title: Beyond Voxel 3D Editing: Learning from 3D Masks and Self-Constructed Data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13688v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:46:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Voxel 3D Editing : Learning from 3D Masks and Self-Constructed Data 

# Yizhao Xu 1,3⋆ Hongyuan Zhu 3† Caiyun Liu 1 Tianfu Wang 2 Keyu Chen 1

# Sicheng Xu 4 Jiaolong Yang 4 Nicholas Jing Yuan 3 Qi Zhang 31The Peking University 2 HKUST(GZ) 3Microsoft AI 4Microsoft Research 

Figure 1. Fast and versatile 3D editing results. Our method supports both global (e.g., add operation, left) and local (e.g., replacement or style change operation, right) edits in seconds. It yields high-quality assets with detailed meshes for geometry and vivid 3D Gaus-sians/Radiance Fields for appearance. 

# Abstract 

3D editing refers to the ability to apply local or global modifications to 3D assets. Effective 3D editing requires maintaining semantic consistency by performing localized changes according to prompts, while also preserving lo-

> ⋆Work done during internship at Microsoft AI.
> †Corresponding author.

cal invariance so that unchanged regions remain consis-tent with the original. However, existing approaches have significant limitations: multi-view editing methods incur losses when projecting back to 3D, while voxel-based edit-ing is constrained in both the regions that can be modi-fied and the scale of modifications. Moreover, the lack of sufficiently large editing datasets for training and evalu-ation remains a challenge. To address these challenges, 

> arXiv:2604.13688v1 [cs.CV] 15 Apr 2026

we propose a Beyond Voxel 3D Editing (BVE) framework with a self-constructed large-scale dataset specifically tai-lored for 3D editing. Building upon this dataset, our model enhances a foundational image-to-3D generative architec-ture with lightweight, trainable modules, enabling efficient injection of textual semantics without the need for expen-sive full-model retraining. Furthermore, we introduce an annotation-free 3D masking strategy to preserve local in-variance, maintaining the integrity of unchanged regions during editing. Extensive experiments demonstrate that BVE achieves superior performance in generating high-quality, text-aligned 3D assets, while faithfully retaining the visual characteristics of the original input. 

# 1. Introduction 

Generative artificial intelligence is revolutionizing 3D con-tent creation, fundamentally reshaping workflows across various domains. 3D generation is widely applied across creative domains such as 3D printing [63], gaming [35], virtual reality (VR), and augmented reality (AR). Recently, a surge of research [10, 21, 32, 39, 81, 93] and develop-ment in 3D generation has made it possible to produce high-resolution 3D assets with physically based rendering (PBR) [11, 23, 70, 83] materials. Users typically create 3D assets from image or text prompts using generative tools. However, it is still chal-lenging to generate high-quality assets in a single attempt — the results often require refinement in professional mod-eling software such as Blender or 3Ds Max to meet produc-tion standards. To better address user needs and enhance the flexibility of 3D generation pipelines, recent studies have begun exploring 3D editing capabilities, enabling more ef-ficient and controllable asset creation workflows. Current text-driven 3D editing approaches primarily fall into two categories, each with inherent trade-offs. The first, leveraging per-instance optimization like Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [7, 15, 54], iteratively refines a 3D asset to match the target prompt. While effective, this process is computationally prohibitive, rendering it impractical for interactive use. To enhance efficiency, a second category of methods pursues an indirect strategy: editing 2D ren-dered views and then lifting these changes back into 3D space [1, 5, 6]. However, this approach often struggles with cross-view consistency, leading to geometric artifacts and textural inconsistencies when fusing the edits into a coher-ent 3D model [8, 43, 51]. More recently, direct manipula-tion of 3D-native representations, such as voxel-level fea-tures in VoxHammer [36], has emerged as a promising di-rection. Yet, these methods still face the critical challenge of achieving precise local edits while preserving the global structure and semantic integrity of unchanged regions. Indeed, 3D editing still faces significant challenges: • Limited datasets: There is a lack of sufficient 3D editing datasets for both training and evaluation. • Semantic consistency: Effective 3D editing requires making localized changes according to prompts while preserving the semantic and structural integrity of un-changed regions. • Flexible editing: Methods need to support both global and local editing of 3D assets. To this end, we propose Beyond Voxel 3D Editing (BVE), an efficient framework that achieves high-quality, text-driven 3D editing while faithfully preserving the orig-inal asset’s identity. Our approach integrates lightweight modules into a pretrained generative model and is validated on a large-scale benchmark we developed specifically for this task. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We construct and will release Edit-3DVerse, the first large-scale, high-quality dataset for text-driven 3D edit-ing, purpose-built to benchmark research in this domain. • We propose the BVE framework, which enables high-fidelity 3D editing via lightweight, trainable modules, eliminating the need for costly full-model retraining. • We design a novel annotation-free 3D masking strategy that ensures semantic and structural consistency by pre-cisely preserving unedited regions. • We demonstrate through extensive experiments that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art ap-proaches in both editing quality and identity preservation. 

# 2. Related Work 

2.1. 3D Generative Models 

Recent advancements in diffusion models [26, 64] and the availability of high-quality 3D datasets [12, 13] have signif-icantly accelerated the development of 3D generative mod-eling [5, 9, 14, 19, 22, 27, 31, 38, 39, 44–47, 50, 60, 66, 69, 72–74, 76–78, 80, 84, 85, 87, 90]. These methods can generally be categorized into two major paradigms. One approach involves generating 3D models by first synthesiz-ing multi-view images and then reconstructing the 3D from these views [29, 30, 46, 47, 56, 57]. However, inconsis-tent multi-view synthesis may lower the quality of the fi-nal 3D model. Alternatively, a series of methods focuses on training native 3D generative models [38, 40–42, 77– 79, 91, 92]. These often comprise a variational autoencoder [34] and a diffusion transformer (DiT) [53] for denoising in latent space. This approach effectively unifies 3D genera-tion with high fidelity and consistency, laying the founda-tion for downstream inversion and editing. 

2.2. 3D Editing 

Compared to traditional image editing tasks [33, 62, 89], 3D editing remains relatively underexplored. This is partly due to the limited availability of high-quality base models 32.1%      

> 32.1%
> 13.3%
> 16.4%
> 6.1%
> 32.1% Add object
> 32.1% Remove object
> 13.3% Replace object
> 16.4% Partial style transform
> 6.1% Partial style transform

Figure 2. Dataset Construction pipeline and Sub-Task Distribution 

and 3D-related datasets. Recently, with advancements in 3D generation models, several works on 3D editing have begun to emerge. For example, work based on Score Distil-lation Sampling (SDS)[54] often requires substantial com-putational resources to achieve effective editing. In con-trast, more recent research [1, 2, 4–6, 16, 37, 94] explores multi-view image editing as an indirect approach to modify-ing 3D assets. This strategy edits 3D content by altering its associated images, but it can introduce noise due to incon-sistencies when projecting multiple views back onto the 3D asset. Recently, TRELLIS proposes a two-stage framework using SS and Slat structures for 3D asset generation. Ad-ditionally, several training-free methods [36, 86] have been introduced that edit voxel-level features directly. For in-stance, Voxhammer [36] merges the inverted sampling of the unmasked regions with the generated masked regions to achieve controlled 3D asset edits. 

# 3. Method 

3.1. Data Creation 

To address limitations in existing 3D editing datasets, we developed an automated data generation pipeline that yielded Edit3D-Verse, a diverse dataset with over 100k high-quality samples curated from an initial pool of over 500k. Our pipeline ensures quality through a three-stage framework: (1) Prompt Construction, (2) Image Genera-tion, and (3) 3D Generation, as illustrated in Fig. 3. 

Prompt Construction. 

We first render a source 3D asset into multi-view images, which are filtered by a VLM to discard low-quality views. For the remaining views, a dual-branch framework gener-ates instructions. One branch uses Gemma 3[67] for global edits like Add or Restyle , while the other targets localized edits by employing SAM-2[59] to isolate object parts and Florence-2[82] to caption them, facilitating precise Replace 

prompts. 

Image Generation. 

Following a generate-and-filter strategy, we produce a high-fidelity edited image that satisfies the instruction while preserving the source viewpoint. Each candidate im-age is rigorously evaluated for: (1) Semantic Alignment with the prompt via CLIP[20] score; (2) Partial Consis-tency with unedited regions, measured by SSIM[71] and ImageHash[65]; and (3) Aesthetic Quality, assessed by a Gemma 3 preference model. 

3D Generation. 

Finally, we reconstruct a 3D asset from the edited image us-ing TRELLIS. Each asset undergoes a dual-evaluation pro-cess to be included in our dataset. It is first assessed for geometric integrity and texture realism from six canonical viewpoints by a Gemma 3 model. Then, edit consistency is verified by comparing a render from the original view-point against the input image using CLIP, SSIM, and LPIPS metrics, ensuring the final output is both high-quality and faithful to the edit. 

> Figure 3. Data Construction Pipeline

3.2. Architecture 

We aim to generate high-quality 3D assets that faithfully reflect text-guided modifications to a given source image. Our method directly synthesizes the desired 3D scene from a text-image pair, bypassing the need for a two-stage, edit-after-generation process, as illustrated in Fig. 4. We follow the TRELLIS framework [81] by representing 3D assets O as structured latents Z—a sparse set of feature-rich voxels—and adopt its VAE architecture for encoding and decoding. Our primary innovation lies in redesigning the generative pipeline for text-guided editing. Following TRELLIS, we employ a two-stage Rectified Flow model to sequentially generate the asset’s sparse structure {pi}Li=1 

and local features {zi}Li=1 . This model learns a vector field 

vθ to transport noise samples ϵ to data samples x0 along linear paths by minimizing the Conditional Flow Matching (CFM) objective: 

LCFM (θ) = Et,x 0,ϵ ∥vθ (xt, t ) − (ϵ − x0)∥22 (1) As is illustrated in Fig. 5, we augment this flow model’s core transformer blocks with two lightweight components: (i) KVComposer : This module injects textual semantics by reparameterizing the image’s K/V projections via affine and low-rank adaptations. (ii) Tri-Attn Block: Fuses self-attention with image/text cross-attention through a channel-wise mixer for multimodal conditioning. Crucially, all newly introduced modules are zero-initialized. This design ensures that our model initially de-faults to the base 3D reconstruction capabilities of TREL-LIS, learning the editing functionality as a minimal and tar-geted adaptation during training. 

KV Composer. To enable text-guided editing without compromising the model’s pre-trained image-to-3D capa-bilities, we propose the KV Composer, a modulation mech-anism that dynamically rewrites the image context Cimg us-ing text features from Ctxt . Inspired by vision-language models, KV Composer operates through a two-stage pro-cess driven by a global text representation t which obtained via mean pooling. This averages the contributions of all words, comprehensively capturing the holistic semantic in-formation of a text prompt, ensuring semantic coherence in the global representation. In 3D editing, this ensures that text instructions are fully understood, leading to more pre-cise and semantically consistent editing results. First, the global text representation t is passed through a linear transformation (implemented as our ‘affine‘ module) to yield a scale vector γ and a shift vector β. These parame-ters perform a coarse-grained, AdaIN-style [28] adjustment to the image context, globally aligning its features with the text description. 

˜Cimg = Cimg ⊙ (1 + γ) + β (2) Figure 4. Overview of our method. Structure Editing: The Flow Edit Transformer modifies the input 3D asset’s sparse structure based on a text prompt and a render image from original 3D asset. Structured Latent Editing: The Sparse Flow Edit Transformer enables fine-grained material and texture modifications. 

Second, to capture finer, text-specific details, we gen-erate two low-rank matrices, U, V ∈ RD×r, also from t.These matrices construct a low-rank residual that provides a parameter-efficient, fine-grained update to the affine-transformed features. 

C′ 

> img

= Cimg + 1

r ˜Cimg VU ⊤ (3) where all modulation parameters ( γ, β, U, V) are func-tions of the text representation t.

Tri-Attention Block. This module effectively fuses mul-timodal inputs by enhancing a standard transformer block with dual cross-attention pathways. Following an initial self-attention step, the current latent state x′ 

> t

is processed by two parallel cross-attention pathways: (1) a text-modulated image context via KV Composer, producing the image cross-attention output aimg , and (2) the raw text context for direct guidance, producing the text cross-attention output 

atxt .To dynamically balance these two pathways, we intro-duce a zero-initialized Mixer that predicts a fusion residual based on the channel-wise concatenated attention outputs: 

δmix = Mixer ([ aimg || atxt ]) (4) This residual is then added to the primary image path-way, framing the text input as a learned refinement rather than a competing signal: 

across = aimg + δmix (5) The result is then integrated back with a residual con-nection and processed through a feed-forward network to produce the block’s final output x′

> t−1

.Designed for stable and efficient multimodal fusion, our KV-Composer and Tri-Attention Block utilize a dual-pathway architecture to combine indirect modulation and direct text attention, maintaining image-to-3D fidelity. Low-rank projections ensure parameter efficiency, while end-to-end training guarantees stable convergence.  

> (a) SS Stage (b) Slat Stage
> Figure 5. The network structures for generation editing.

3.3. Training 

Mask-Enhanced Loss for Spatially-Aware Editing. To ensure precise preservation of unedited regions during 3D editing, we introduce an automatic mask generation mecha-nism based on point cloud registration. Given original point cloud Porig and edited point cloud Pedit , we first compute a rigid transformation T∗ via RANSAC[3] and ICP[18] to align Porig with Pedit . As shown in Fig. 6, we define the preservation mask M ∈ { 0, 1}H×W ×D by identifying spa-tially consistent regions: M(x, y, z ) = [min q∈P edit ∥T∗ ·

p − q∥ < τ ], where p = [ x, y, z ]⊤ and τ is the inlier threshold. This mask is incorporated into our flow matching objective as: 

Ledit = Et, x,ϵ 

∥vθ − ve∥2 + ∥M ⊙ (vθ − vo)∥2 (6) where x = {xe

> 0

, xo

> 0

} represents edited-original paired data sample, vedit = ( ϵ − xe

> 0

) and vorig = ( ϵ − xo

> 0

) are the rec-tified flow target, and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplica-Figure 6. Editing Preservation Mask 

tion. The second term applies an additional penalty on pre-served regions, enforcing the model to maintain geometric fidelity in non-edited areas without requiring manual anno-tations. We generate masks at both 16 3 and 64 3 resolutions for sparse structure and latent space training, respectively. 

# 4. Experiments 

Implementation Details. We trained on 100k triplets selected from Edit-3DVerse, our large-scale 3D editing dataset. As shown in Fig. 5, we adopt parameter-efficient fine-tuning: among 2.2B total parameters, 1.1B pre-trained TRELLIS weights are frozen (self-attention and position embeddings), while only dual-modal cross-attention, KV-Composer, and Mixer modules are trained. This preserves the original image-to-3D capability while enabling editing. We use AdamW[48] with learning rate 10 −4 and CFG[25] with 10% drop rate. Training takes 60k steps with batch size 64 on 8 H20 GPUs (96GB). At inference, we use CFG scale 3.0 with 25 Euler sampling steps. 

Baselines. We select four representative state-of-the-art methods as baselines. Vox-E[61] performs per-scene optimization on voxel representation with the guidance of image diffusion models. Tailor3D[55] achieves cus-tomized 3D asset editing through multi-view editing. TRELLIS[81] provides a native 3D editing method based on RePaint[49].Additionally, we use Hunyuan3D[68] to generate 3D models with the edited images as an editing approach. 

Evaluation dataset. Our Edit-3DVerse dataset comprises 3D pairs, instructions, and rendered views from the TRELLIS-500K dataset. During dataset construction, we employ Gemma3[67] to automatically annotate 3D assets and classify them accordingly. We then perform class bal-ancing across 31 distinct categories, ultimately selecting 100K 3D pairs and instructions. We select 100 representa-tive cases from the Edit-3DVerse dataset for the experiments and demonstrations in this section, which are not part of our training set or those of the compared methods. 

Evaluation Metrics. We comprehensively evaluate our method across two key aspects: overall 3D quality, and prompt alignment. First, for unedited region preserva-tion, we assess the fidelity of preserved regions by com-puting Chamfer Distance (CD)[17], as well as SSIM[71], and LPIPS[88]. To assess overall 3D quality, we com-pute the Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID) [24] between ren-dered images of our generated assets and a reference set. For prompt alignment, we evaluate the consistency of the edited 3D assets with both text and image inputs. Align-ment with the text prompt is measured using the CLIP-T score [58]. Consistency with the target edited image is eval-uated by computing the DINO-I score [52] between its ren-dered views and the target image. Additionally, we con-ducted a user study to quantify subjective quality through perceptual preferences. 

4.1. Main Results 

Quantitative Comparison. As shown in Tab. 1, our method significantly outperforms all baselines, across nearly all metrics. This is attributed to our method’s su-perior ability to learn latent variable transformations under semantic guidance, coupled with its effective utilization of a two-stage denoising network and a 3D mask for robust con-sistency enforcement. In contrast, multi-view based meth-ods like Tailor3D[55], which rely on lifting multi-view ed-its to 3D space, often introduce multi-view inconsistencies and spatial biases, consequently struggling with maintain-ing overall 3D coherence. TRELLIS [81] adopts Repaint [49] for native 3D editing. However, its global operations on the entire voxel space often cause a global structural shift in the generated content. This limitation inherent to local-filling (inpaint-like) methods results in suboptimal 3D consistency. Furthermore, regarding overall 3D quality and condition alignment, our method demonstrates its superior-ity by achieving the lowest FID and the highest DINO-I and CLIP-T scores. Collectively, these results robustly indicate that our editing operations yield coherent and accurate out-comes in high-fidelity 3D models. 

Qualitative comparison. The qualitative results pre-sented in Fig. 7 distinctly highlight the superior perfor-mance of our method. Our approach consistently gener-ates edits that are both precise and geometrically coher-ent for both local and global modifications, while faith-fully preserving the original 3D content with high fidelity. In contrast, baseline methods generally exhibit various ar-tifacts and fragmentation. Specifically, methods such as Vox-E [61] and Tailor3D [55] suffer from suboptimal re-construction quality, leading to blurry outputs and notice-able distortions in preserved regions. Furthermore, the na-tive TRELLIS [81] editing method, when handling global modifications, struggles due to its inability to effectively Method CD ↓ SSIM ↑ LPIPS ↓ FID ↓ FVD ↓ DINO-I ↑ CLIP-T ↑

Vox-E [61] / 0.539 0.346 217.9 8590 0.371 0.051 Tailor3D [55] 0.067 0.751 0.198 146.3 4743 0.633 0.21 TRELLIS [81] 0.063 0.865 0.225 140.7 3986 0.910 0.25 Hunyuan [68] 0.021 0.853 0.087 119.83 1520 0.850 0.269 Ours (full) 0.013 0.960 0.039 28.9 1139 0.960 0.287 

w/o MASK 0.019 0.824 0.048 49.2 1274 0.939 0.27 

Table 1. Quantitative Comparison . We evaluate 3D consistency using Chamfer Distance (CD.), masked SSIM,LPIPS on unedited regions, overall 3D quality with FID and FVD, and condition alignment with DINO-I and CLIP-T. Our method consistently achieves superior structure consistency, semantic alignment with the target edited image, and generation fidelity. 

Figure 7. Qualitative comparison . Our method achieves superior editing performance with faithful instruction-semantic alignment and remarkable original structure consistency across multi-view images. Notably, the quality of our edited 3D models is comparable to those generated by TRELLIS using editing images. Method Text Alignment ↑ Overall 3D Quality ↑

TRELLIS 63.0% 61.5% Hunyuan 81.0% 81.0% 

Ours 91.0% 88.5%  

> Table 2. User study . We omit results for Tailor3D and Vox-E from the table for clarity, given the strong user preference for Hunyuan and BVE. As evidenced by the table, our method was preferred by participants.

adjust the entire 3D space, which often results in unnatural blending and fragmentation of content across different re-gions. Our method effectively circumvents all these afore-mentioned issues, robustly demonstrating the power of our editing framework. 

User Study. We conducted a user study with 30 partici-pants to evaluate editing quality and usability. Each round showcased an original 3D object, task instructions, and the results from Tailor3D, Vox-E, TRELLIS, Hunyuan3D, and BVE. Participants then selected the preferred method based on Prompt Alignment, Visual Quality, and Shape Preserva-tion. As shown in Tab. 2, BVE consistently received the highest preference across all criteria, indicating superior se-mantic alignment, visual quality, and shape fidelity. To en-hance clarity, results from Tailor3D and Vox-E are omitted, as user preferences were predominantly for TRELLIS, Hun-yuan3D, and BVE. 

4.2. Ablation Study 

We sequentially validate the effectiveness of structure edit-ing and structured latent editing strategies. 

> Figure 8. Ablation study on Structure/Structured Latent Editing

Structure/Structured Latent Editing Analysis. We ana-lyzed two inference approaches: (1) editing solely in the ST stage, (2) editing solely in the SLAT stage, and (3) editing in both the ST and SLAT stages, which constitutes our full setting. As shown in Fig. 8, we found that initial ST-stage editing provides a reasonable reconstruction of coarse ge-ometry but lacks detailed geometry and appearance consis-tency. After incorporating the second SLAT editing stage, which handles high-resolution geometry and fine-grained texture details, the reconstruction quality significantly im-proves. This demonstrates that our two-stage editing pro-cess faithfully achieves high-fidelity 3D editing capabilities. 

> Figure 9. Ablation study on Mask-Enhanced Loss

Assessment of 3D Mask Loss. We compared two loss de-signs: with and without our 3D mask loss. Quantitative re-sults (Tab. 1) and qualitative comparisons (Fig. 9) show that omitting the 3D mask degrades preservation quality. Due to current 3D generation limitations, the mask is crucial for leveraging original 3D features, thereby maintaining local structural invariance. Our full setting significantly enhances preserved region consistency and overall coherent editing, validating the critical role of our proposed 3D mask loss. 

# 5. Conclusion 

In this work, we present BVE, a fully text-guided frame-work for 3D object editing, capable of both localized and global editing. It supports operations such as object removal, addition, replacement, style transfer, and material alteration. By integrating KV Composer and Tri-Attention Block into the original TRELLIS pipeline and introducing a 3D mask loss during training, BVE achieves geometrically consistent and semantically faithful edits. Extensive exper-iments demonstrate its state-of-the-art performance across diverse editing tasks. Furthermore, we constructed Edit-3DVerse and proposed a high-quality editing evaluation pipeline, making it the first large-scale dataset specifically designed for 3D editing, thereby laying a foundation for future research on feedforward DiT-based editing models. 

# References   

> [1] Roi Bar-On, Dana Cohen-Bar, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Ed-itp23: 3d editing via propagation of image prompts to multi-view. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20652 , 2025. 2, 3

[2] Amir Barda, Matheus Gadelha, Vladimir G. Kim, Noam Aigerman, Amit H. Bermano, and Thibault Groueix. In-stant3dit: Multiview inpainting for fast editing of 3d objects, 2024. 3 [3] Paul J Besl and Neil D McKay. A method for registration of 3-d shapes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 14(2):239–256, 1992. 5 [4] Chenjie Cao, Chaohui Yu, Fan Wang, Xiangyang Xue, and Yanwei Fu. Mvinpainter: Learning multi-view consistent inpainting to bridge 2d and 3d editing, 2024. 3 [5] Hansheng Chen, Ruoxi Shi, Yulin Liu, Bokui Shen, Ji-ayuan Gu, Gordon Wetzstein, Hao Su, and Leonidas Guibas. Generic 3d diffusion adapter using controlled multi-view editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12032 , 2024. 2 [6] Minghao Chen, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. Dge: Di-rect gaussian 3d editing by consistent multi-view editing. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 74–92. Springer, 2024. 2, 3 [7] Minghao Chen, Junyu Xie, Iro Laina, and Andrea Vedaldi. Shap-editor: Instruction-guided latent 3d editing in seconds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition , pages 26456–26466, 2024. 2 [8] Minghao Chen, Roman Shapovalov, Iro Laina, Tom Mon-nier, Jianyuan Wang, David Novotny, and Andrea Vedaldi. Partgen: Part-level 3d generation and reconstruction with multi-view diffusion models. In Proceedings of the Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 5881–5892, 2025. 2 [9] Sijin Chen, Xin Chen, Anqi Pang, Xianfang Zeng, Wei Cheng, Yijun Fu, Fukun Yin, Yanru Wang, Zhibin Wang, Chi Zhang, Jingyi Yu, Gang Yu, Bin Fu, and Tao Chen. Meshxl: Neural coordinate field for generative 3d foundation models, 2024. 2 [10] Yiwen Chen, Tong He, Di Huang, Weicai Ye, Sijin Chen, Ji-axiang Tang, Xin Chen, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, Gang Yu, et al. Meshanything: Artist-created mesh generation with au-toregressive transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10163 ,2024. 2 [11] Zhaoxi Chen, Jiaxiang Tang, Yuhao Dong, Ziang Cao, Fangzhou Hong, Yushi Lan, Tengfei Wang, Haozhe Xie, Tong Wu, Shunsuke Saito, et al. 3dtopia-xl: Scaling high-quality 3d asset generation via primitive diffusion. In Pro-ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 26576–26586, 2025. 2 [12] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt, Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects, 2022. 2 [13] Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan, Christian Laforte, Vikram Voleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al. Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 36:35799–35813, 2023. 2 [14] Junting Dong, Qi Fang, Zehuan Huang, Xudong Xu, Jingbo Wang, Sida Peng, and Bo Dai. Tela: Text to layer-wise 3d clothed human generation, 2024. 2 [15] Shaocong Dong, Lihe Ding, Zhanpeng Huang, Zibin Wang, Tianfan Xue, and Dan Xu. Interactive3d: Create what you want by interactive 3d generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4999–5008, 2024. 2 [16] Ziya Erkoc ¸, Can G¨ umeli, Chaoyang Wang, Matthias Nießner, Angela Dai, Peter Wonka, Hsin-Ying Lee, and Peiye Zhuang. Preditor3d: Fast and precise 3d shape edit-ing, 2024. 3 [17] Haoqiang Fan, Hao Su, and Leonidas Guibas. A point set generation network for 3d object reconstruction from a single image, 2016. 6 [18] Martin A Fischler and Robert C Bolles. Random sample consensus: a paradigm for model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography. Communications of the ACM , 24(6):381–395, 1981. 5 [19] Daoyi Gao, Yawar Siddiqui, Lei Li, and Angela Dai. Me-shart: Generating articulated meshes with structure-guided transformers, 2025. 2 [20] Markus Hafner, Maria Katsantoni, Tino K¨ oster, James Marks, Joyita Mukherjee, Dorothee Staiger, Jernej Ule, and Mihaela Zavolan. Clip and complementary methods. Nature Reviews Methods Primers , 1(1):20, 2021. 4 [21] Zekun Hao, David W Romero, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Yu Liu. Meshtron: High-fidelity, artist-like 3d mesh generation at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09548 , 2024. 2 [22] Zekun Hao, David W. Romero, Tsung-Yi Lin, and Ming-Yu Liu. Meshtron: High-fidelity, artist-like 3d mesh generation at scale, 2024. 2 [23] Zexin He, Tengfei Wang, Xin Huang, Xingang Pan, and Zi-wei Liu. Neural lightrig: Unlocking accurate object normal and material estimation with multi-light diffusion. In Pro-ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 26514–26524, 2025. 2 [24] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilib-rium. Advances in neural information processing systems ,30, 2017. 6 [25] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2022. 6 [26] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2 [27] Yicong Hong, Kai Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Sai Bi, Yang Zhou, Difan Liu, Feng Liu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Trung Bui, and Hao Tan. Lrm: Large reconstruction model for single image to 3d, 2024. 2 [28] Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In ICCV ,2017. 4 [29] Xiufeng Huang, Ka Chun Cheung, Runmin Cong, Simon See, and Renjie Wan. Stereo-gs: Multi-view stereo vision model for generalizable 3d gaussian splatting reconstruction, 2025. 2 [30] Zehuan Huang, Yuan-Chen Guo, Haoran Wang, Ran Yi, Lizhuang Ma, Yan-Pei Cao, and Lu Sheng. Mv-adapter: Multi-view consistent image generation made easy, 2024. 2 [31] Zehuan Huang, Hao Wen, Junting Dong, Yaohui Wang, Yangguang Li, Xinyuan Chen, Yan-Pei Cao, Ding Liang, Yu Qiao, Bo Dai, and Lu Sheng. Epidiff: Enhancing multi-view synthesis via localized epipolar-constrained diffusion, 2024. 2[32] Zehuan Huang, Hao Wen, Junting Dong, Yaohui Wang, Yangguang Li, Xinyuan Chen, Yan-Pei Cao, Ding Liang, Yu Qiao, Bo Dai, et al. Epidiff: Enhancing multi-view synthesis via localized epipolar-constrained diffusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , pages 9784–9794, 2024. 2 [33] Xuan Ju, Xian Liu, Xintao Wang, Yuxuan Bian, Ying Shan, and Qiang Xu. Brushnet: A plug-and-play image inpainting model with decomposed dual-branch diffusion. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 150–168. Springer, 2024. 2 [34] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding varia-tional bayes, 2022. 2 [35] Zeqiang Lai, Yunfei Zhao, Haolin Liu, Zibo Zhao, Qingxi-ang Lin, Huiwen Shi, Xianghui Yang, Mingxin Yang, Shuhui Yang, Yifei Feng, et al. Hunyuan3d 2.5: Towards high-fidelity 3d assets generation with ultimate details. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16504 , 2025. 2 [36] Lin Li, Zehuan Huang, Haoran Feng, Gengxiong Zhuang, Rui Chen, Chunchao Guo, and Lu Sheng. Voxhammer: Training-free precise and coherent 3d editing in native 3d space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19247 , 2025. 2, 3, 19 [37] Peng Li, Suizhi Ma, Jialiang Chen, Yuan Liu, Congyi Zhang, Wei Xue, Wenhan Luo, Alla Sheffer, Wenping Wang, and Yike Guo. Cmd: Controllable multiview diffusion for 3d editing and progressive generation, 2025. 3 [38] Weiyu Li, Jiarui Liu, Hongyu Yan, Rui Chen, Yixun Liang, Xuelin Chen, Ping Tan, and Xiaoxiao Long. Craftsman3d: High-fidelity mesh generation with 3d native generation and interactive geometry refiner, 2025. 2 [39] Weiyu Li, Xuanyang Zhang, Zheng Sun, Di Qi, Hao Li, Wei Cheng, Weiwei Cai, Shihao Wu, Jiarui Liu, Zihao Wang, et al. Step1x-3d: Towards high-fidelity and con-trollable generation of textured 3d assets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07747 , 2025. 2 [40] Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Zexiang Liu, Dehu Wang, Yuan Liang, Zhipeng Yu, Xingchao Liu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding Liang, Wanli Ouyang, and Yan-Pei Cao. Triposg: High-fidelity 3d shape synthesis using large-scale rectified flow models, 2025. 2 [41] Yangguang Li, Zi-Xin Zou, Zexiang Liu, Dehu Wang, Yuan Liang, Zhipeng Yu, Xingchao Liu, Yuan-Chen Guo, Ding Liang, Wanli Ouyang, et al. Triposg: High-fidelity 3d shape synthesis using large-scale rectified flow models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06608 , 2025. [42] Yuchen Lin, Chenguo Lin, Panwang Pan, Honglei Yan, Yiqiang Feng, Yadong Mu, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Partcrafter: Structured 3d mesh generation via compositional latent diffusion transformers, 2025. 2 [43] Feng-Lin Liu, Hongbo Fu, Yu-Kun Lai, and Lin Gao. Sketchdream: Sketch-based text-to-3d generation and edit-ing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 43(4):1–13, 2024. 2 [44] Minghua Liu, Ruoxi Shi, Linghao Chen, Zhuoyang Zhang, Chao Xu, Xinyue Wei, Hansheng Chen, Chong Zeng, Ji-ayuan Gu, and Hao Su. One-2-3-45++: Fast single image to 3d objects with consistent multi-view generation and 3d diffusion, 2023. 2 [45] Minghua Liu, Chao Xu, Haian Jin, Linghao Chen, Mukund Varma T, Zexiang Xu, and Hao Su. One-2-3-45: Any single image to 3d mesh in 45 seconds without per-shape optimization, 2023. [46] Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Syncdreamer: Gen-erating multiview-consistent images from a single-view im-age, 2024. 2 [47] Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma, Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, and Wenping Wang. Wonder3d: Single image to 3d using cross-domain diffusion, 2023. 2 [48] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 , 2017. 6 [49] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11461–11471, 2022. 6 [50] Quan Meng, Lei Li, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Lt3sd: Latent trees for 3d scene diffusion, 2025. 2 [51] Aryan Mikaeili, Or Perel, Mehdi Safaee, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ali Mahdavi-Amiri. Sked: Sketch-guided text-based 3d editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-ference on Computer Vision , pages 14607–14619, 2023. 2 [52] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Th´ eo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. 6 [53] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers, 2023. 2 [54] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Milden-hall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988 , 2022. 2, 3 [55] Zhangyang Qi, Yunhan Yang, Mengchen Zhang, Long Xing, Xiaoyang Wu, Tong Wu, Dahua Lin, Xihui Liu, Jiaqi Wang, and Hengshuang Zhao. Tailor3d: Customized 3d assets edit-ing and generation with dual-side images, 2024. 6, 7 [56] Yansong Qu, Shaohui Dai, Xinyang Li, Yuze Wang, You Shen, Liujuan Cao, and Rongrong Ji. Deocc-1-to-3: 3d de-occlusion from a single image via self-supervised multi-view diffusion, 2025. 2 [57] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision, 2021. 2 [58] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. 6 [59] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman R¨ adle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junt-ing Pan, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Doll´ ar, and Christoph Feicht-enhofer. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024. 3 [60] Barbara Roessle, Norman M¨ uller, Lorenzo Porzi, Samuel Rota Bul` o, Peter Kontschieder, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. L3dg: Latent 3d gaussian diffusion. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , page 1–11. ACM, 2024. 2 [61] Etai Sella, Gal Fiebelman, Peter Hedman, and Hadar Averbuch-Elor. Vox-e: Text-guided voxel editing of 3d ob-jects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12048 , 2023. 6, 7 [62] Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, and Weilin Huang. Seededit: Align image re-generation to image editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.06686 , 2024. 2 [63] Jin-ho Son, Hongseok Kim, Yoonseob Choi, and Howon Lee. 3d printed energy devices: generation, conversion, and storage. Microsystems & Nanoengineering , 10(1):93, 2024. 2[64] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denois-ing diffusion implicit models, 2022. 2 [65] Ashwin Swaminathan, Yinian Mao, and Min Wu. Robust and secure image hashing. IEEE Transactions on Informa-tion Forensics and security , 1(2):215–230, 2006. 4 [66] Jiaxiang Tang, Zhaoxi Chen, Xiaokang Chen, Tengfei Wang, Gang Zeng, and Ziwei Liu. Lgm: Large multi-view gaussian model for high-resolution 3d content creation, 2024. 2 [67] Gemma Team. Gemma 3, 2025. 3, 6, 13 [68] Tencent Hunyuan3D Team. Hunyuan3d 2.1: From images to high-fidelity 3d assets with production-ready pbr material, 2025. 6, 7 [69] Vikram Voleti, Chun-Han Yao, Mark Boss, Adam Letts, David Pankratz, Dmitry Tochilkin, Christian Laforte, Robin Rombach, and Varun Jampani. Sv3d: Novel multi-view syn-thesis and 3d generation from a single image using latent video diffusion, 2024. 2 [70] Bruce Walter, Stephen R Marschner, Hongsong Li, and Ken-neth E Torrance. Microfacet models for refraction through rough surfaces. Rendering techniques , 2007:18th, 2007. 2 [71] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Si-moncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing ,13(4):600–612, 2004. 4, 6 [72] Zhengyi Wang, Jonathan Lorraine, Yikai Wang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Sanja Fidler, and Xiaohui Zeng. Llama-mesh: Uni-fying 3d mesh generation with language models, 2024. 2 [73] Zhengyi Wang, Yikai Wang, Yifei Chen, Chendong Xiang, Shuo Chen, Dajiang Yu, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. Crm: Single image to 3d textured mesh with convolu-tional reconstruction model, 2024. [74] Si-Tong Wei, Rui-Huan Wang, Chuan-Zhi Zhou, Baoquan Chen, and Peng-Shuai Wang. Octgpt: Octree-based multi-scale autoregressive models for 3d shape generation, 2025. 2[75] Chenfei Wu, Jiahao Li, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kaiyuan Gao, Kun Yan, Sheng ming Yin, Shuai Bai, Xiao Xu, Yilei Chen, Yuxiang Chen, Zecheng Tang, Zekai Zhang, Zhengyi Wang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Chen Cheng, Dayiheng Liu, De-qing Li, Hang Zhang, Hao Meng, Hu Wei, Jingyuan Ni, Kai Chen, Kuan Cao, Liang Peng, Lin Qu, Minggang Wu, Peng Wang, Shuting Yu, Tingkun Wen, Wensen Feng, Xiaoxiao Xu, Yi Wang, Yichang Zhang, Yongqiang Zhu, Yujia Wu, Yuxuan Cai, and Zenan Liu. Qwen-image technical report, 2025. 13 [76] Kailu Wu, Fangfu Liu, Zhihan Cai, Runjie Yan, Hanyang Wang, Yating Hu, Yueqi Duan, and Kaisheng Ma. Unique3d: High-quality and efficient 3d mesh generation from a single image, 2024. 2 [77] Ruiqi Wu, Xinjie Wang, Liu Liu, Chunle Guo, Jiaxiong Qiu, Chongyi Li, Lichao Huang, Zhizhong Su, and Ming-Ming Cheng. Dipo: Dual-state images controlled articulated object generation powered by diverse data, 2025. 2 [78] Shuang Wu, Youtian Lin, Feihu Zhang, Yifei Zeng, Jingxi Xu, Philip Torr, Xun Cao, and Yao Yao. Direct3d: Scalable image-to-3d generation via 3d latent diffusion transformer, 2024. 2 [79] Shuang Wu, Youtian Lin, Feihu Zhang, Yifei Zeng, Yikang Yang, Yajie Bao, Jiachen Qian, Siyu Zhu, Xun Cao, Philip Torr, and Yao Yao. Direct3d-s2: Gigascale 3d generation made easy with spatial sparse attention, 2025. 2 [80] Zhennan Wu, Yang Li, Han Yan, Taizhang Shang, Weixuan Sun, Senbo Wang, Ruikai Cui, Weizhe Liu, Hiroyuki Sato, Hongdong Li, and Pan Ji. Blockfusion: Expandable 3d scene generation using latent tri-plane extrapolation, 2024. 2 [81] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d gen-eration. 2024. 2, 4, 6, 7 [82] Bin Xiao, Haiping Wu, Weijian Xu, Xiyang Dai, Houdong Hu, Yumao Lu, Michael Zeng, Ce Liu, and Lu Yuan. Florence-2: Advancing a unified representation for a vari-ety of vision tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.06242 , 2023. 4[83] Bojun Xiong, Jialun Liu, Jiakui Hu, Chenming Wu, Jinbo Wu, Xing Liu, Chen Zhao, Errui Ding, and Zhouhui Lian. Texgaussian: Generating high-quality pbr material via octree-based 3d gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 551–561, 2025. 2 [84] Jiale Xu, Weihao Cheng, Yiming Gao, Xintao Wang, Shenghua Gao, and Ying Shan. Instantmesh: Efficient 3d mesh generation from a single image with sparse-view large reconstruction models, 2024. 2 [85] Junliang Ye, Zhengyi Wang, Ruowen Zhao, Shenghao Xie, and Jun Zhu. Shapellm-omni: A native multimodal llm for 3d generation and understanding, 2025. 2 [86] Junliang Ye, Shenghao Xie, Ruowen Zhao, Zhengyi Wang, Hongyu Yan, Wenqiang Zu, Lei Ma, and Jun Zhu. Nano3d: A training-free approach for efficient 3d editing without masks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15019 , 2025. 3 [87] Longwen Zhang, Ziyu Wang, Qixuan Zhang, Qiwei Qiu, Anqi Pang, Haoran Jiang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. Clay: A controllable large-scale generative model for creating high-quality 3d assets, 2024. 2 [88] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shecht-man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-tion , pages 586–595, 2018. 6 [89] Haozhe Zhao, Xiaojian Shawn Ma, Liang Chen, Shuzheng Si, Rujie Wu, Kaikai An, Peiyu Yu, Minjia Zhang, Qing Li, and Baobao Chang. Ultraedit: Instruction-based fine-grained image editing at scale. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:3058–3093, 2024. 2 [90] Ruowen Zhao, Junliang Ye, Zhengyi Wang, Guangce Liu, Yiwen Chen, Yikai Wang, and Jun Zhu. Deepmesh: Auto-regressive artist-mesh creation with reinforcement learning, 2025. 2 [91] Wang Zhao, Yan-Pei Cao, Jiale Xu, Yuejiang Dong, and Ying Shan. Assembler: Scalable 3d part assembly via an-chor point diffusion, 2025. 2 [92] Zibo Zhao, Wen Liu, Xin Chen, Xianfang Zeng, Rui Wang, Pei Cheng, Bin Fu, Tao Chen, Gang Yu, and Shenghua Gao. Michelangelo: Conditional 3d shape generation based on shape-image-text aligned latent representation, 2023. 2 [93] Zibo Zhao, Zeqiang Lai, Qingxiang Lin, Yunfei Zhao, Haolin Liu, Shuhui Yang, Yifei Feng, Mingxin Yang, Sheng Zhang, Xianghui Yang, et al. Hunyuan3d 2.0: Scaling diffu-sion models for high resolution textured 3d assets generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12202 , 2025. 2 [94] Yang Zheng, Mengqi Huang, Nan Chen, and Zhendong Mao. Pro3d-editor : A progressive-views perspective for consis-tent and precise 3d editing, 2025. 3 Beyond Voxel 3D Editing : Learning from 3D Masks and Self-Constructed Data 

# Supplementary Material 

Overview In this supplementary material, we provide ad-ditional details and experimental results for the main paper, including: • Further details of our Edit3D-Verse dataset Sec. A and BVE Sec. B; • Additional experimental results on 3D editing and com-parison with training-free methods. • A discussion of the limitations of our work and future works. 

# A. Details of Our Dataset Construction 

Recognizing that both the scale and quality of training data are pivotal for scaling up generative models, we meticulously curated a large-scale, high-fidelity 3D editing dataset derived from existing open-source 3D repositories, as shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. Furthermore, we lever-age the state-of-the-art multimodal model, Gemma, to rig-orously evaluate and filter the generated assets. This step is crucial to ensure that the retained 3D assets not only possess high visual quality but also strictly adhere to the given edit-ing instructions. Consequently, this strategy significantly enhances the accuracy and controllability of text-guided 3D editing. 

A.1. Details of Instructional Prompts 

To synthesize a rich dataset of instruction-following pairs, we leveraged the Gemma model [67] to interpret each gen-erated source image and produce corresponding editing in-structions. Crucially, we prompt the model to generate in-structions across diverse editing types, ranging from object manipulation to stylistic changes. A concrete example is il-lustrated by the airplane image in the top-left of Fig. 12. Subsequently, each synthesized prompt is paired with its source image and fed into QwenImageEdit [75] to execute the editing process. As shown in Fig. 3, this pipeline suc-cessfully yields high-quality edited results aligned with var-ied instruction types. 

A.2. Captioning Process 

To guarantee the integrity of our constructed dataset, we establish a systematic multi-stage data curation pipeline de-signed to filter for both visual fidelity and semantic align-ment. Visual Quality Assessment. Acknowledging the vari-able outputs of open-source editing models, we first em-ploy a pre-trained aesthetic assessment model to screen the generated 2D image pairs, ensuring that only high-quality imagery serves as the foundation for 3D generation. Subse-quently, to evaluate the generated 3D assets, we render eight images from uniformly distributed viewpoints around each object and compute the average aesthetic score across these views. As shown in Fig. 14, this metric effectively identifies artifacts such as minimal texturing or simplistic geometry. By enforcing strict thresholds (9.0 for Restyle; 7.8 for oth-ers), we retain only assets with high geometric and textural complexity (qualitative examples in Fig. 15). Alignment Verification Strategy. Beyond visual quality, ensuring pre-cise text-object alignment is critical. We address this via a verification-by-rendering strategy. Specifically, we render the generated 3D asset from the exact camera viewpoint of the source image. Leveraging the inherent view consistency of the 2D editing model, we treat the 2D edited image as the pseudo-ground truth. We then quantify the alignment be-tween this 2D reference and the 3D rendering using SSIM and LPIPS. This step rigorously filters out low-fidelity sam-ples, selecting only those 3D assets that are semantically consistent with the editing instructions. 

A.3. Rendering Process 

For the image-text-conditioned generation model, we sam-ple 64 camera viewpoints uniformly distributed across a sphere with a radius of 2. Furthermore, we implement a Field-of-View (FoV) augmentation strategy, where the FoV is randomly varied within the range of 10 ◦ to 70 ◦.

# B. More Implementation Details 

B.1. Network Architectures 

The generation framework in our method employs two dis-tinct flow matching networks tailored for different data rep-resentations: a dense transformer for coarse structure gener-ation and a hybrid sparse convolution-transformer network for fine-grained latent editing. 

Structure Flow Network. To generate the global 3D structure, we employ the SparseStructureFlowEditNet, which operates on dense voxel grids. Following the design of Diffusion Transformers (DiT), the input 3D volume is first tokenized via a patchify operation with a patch size of 23, followed by a linear projection to the model dimen-sion. We utilize absolute position embeddings (APE) to re-tain spatial information. The core of the network consists of a series of Modulated Tri-Attention Blocks . We incorpo-rate adaptive layer normalization (adaLN) to inject timestep information, modulating the normalized content via scale, shift, and gate parameters. Figure 10. More examples of generative data from text-guided local editing in our proposed Edit3D-Verse dataset. 

Sparse Latent Flow Network. For the fine-grained edit-ing of structured latents (Slat), we introduce the SlatFlow-ModelEditNet. Recognizing the sparsity of high-resolution 3D data, this network adopts a hybrid U-Net architecture 

that combines the efficiency of sparse convolutions with the global modeling capabilities of transformers. The network features a symmetric encoder-decoder structure with skip connections: • Encoder/Decoder: The encoding path comprises a series of Sparse ResBlocks utilizing sparse convolutions, layer normalizations, and SiLU activations. We employ sparse strided convolutions for downsampling and sparse trans-posed convolutions for upsampling. • Middle Stage: The bottleneck processing is handled by a stack of Sparse Modulated Tri-Attention Blocks , de-signed to operate natively on sparse tensors to maximize memory efficiency. • Elastic Management: To handle varying memory loads during training, we integrate an elastic mixing mechanism that dynamically manages gradient flows. 

Modulated Tri-Attention Mechanism. To effectively in-tegrate multi-modal guidance—maintaining fidelity to the source image while adhering to textual editing instruc-tions—we introduce a specialized Tri-Attention mechanism applied in both networks with domain-specific adaptations. 

1) Dense Tri-Attention with KV-Composition. In the dense structure network, we employ a KV-Composer mod-Figure 11. More examples of generative data from text-guided global editing in our proposed Edit3D-Verse dataset. 

ule to facilitate deep interaction between the visual and tex-tual conditions before the attention operation. The KV-Composer modulates the image context based on the text prompts via an affine transformation supplemented by a low-rank adaptation (LoRA) branch. This injects the se-mantic editing intent directly into the visual keys and val-ues. Subsequently, a learnable linear Mixer fuses the at-tention outputs from both modalities, producing a residual update that balances visual preservation and semantic mod-ification. 

2) Sparse Tri-Attention. For the sparse latent network, we adopt a memory-efficient Late-Fusion Strategy . We com-pute independent sparse cross-attention maps for image and text conditions. Similar to the dense counterpart, a channel-wise mixing layer aggregates these distinct attention flows, generating a unified conditioning signal that guides the flow matching process. 

Initialization Details. We follow standard initialization protocols for transformers. Crucially, to ensure training sta-bility, we employ a zero-initialization strategy for the final projection layers of the KV-Composer (LoRA branch), the Mixer, and the adaLN modulation blocks. This ensures that at the initial training stage, the complex multi-modal inter-action modules behave as identity functions, progressively learning the editing dynamics. 

B.2. Training Details 

Both the Structured Latent (Slat) and Sparse Structure (SS) models are trained using the Flow Matching framework with an Optimal Transport (OT) path. The objective is to regress the vector field vt that transports the Gaussian noise distribution to the data distribution, optimized via a standard squared error loss. To bias training towards critical noise levels, we sample time steps t from a Logit-Normal distri-bution, using parameters μ = 1 .0 for the Slat model to em-phasize structure formation and μ = 0 .0 for the SS model to ensure balanced diffusion. Conditioning signals are de-rived from DINOv2 (image) and CLIP (text) encoders, with a 10% random dropout rate applied to enable Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) during inference. Optimization is performed using the AdamW optimizer with mixed-precision (FP16) for 1, 000 , 000 steps at a learn-ing rate of 1 × 10 −4. We employ adaptive gradient clipping Figure 12. Editing instruction prompts 

> Figure 13. Image generation prompts

based on historical norms (max 2.0) to stabilize the train-ing dynamics. Crucially, to address the significant memory variance inherent in processing high-resolution sparse grids (64 3), we implement an Elastic Memory Controller for the Slat model. This mechanism dynamically adjusts the batch workload in real-time to maintain a target GPU memory uti-lization of 0.75 , ensuring efficient distributed training with-out out-of-Memory errors. 

B.3. Evaluation Metrics 

To thoroughly evaluate the quality of our generated 3D as-sets, we employ a comprehensive set of metrics covering geometry accuracy, visual fidelity, semantic alignment, and distribution quality. 

Geometry Accuracy. We assess the structural quality of the generated meshes using the Chamfer Distance (CD) .Let Sg and Sr be the point clouds sampled from the gener-ated mesh and the reference mesh, respectively. The sym-Figure 14. Distribution of aesthetic scores in different action types. 

Figure 15. Image examples from Edit3D-Verse with their corre-sponding overall scores 

Figure 16. 3D asset examples from Edit3D-Verse with their corre-sponding overall scores 

metric Chamfer Distance is defined as: CD (Sg , S r ) = 1

|Sg |

X

> x∈Sg

min 

> y∈Sr

∥x−y∥22+ 1

|Sr |

X

> y∈Sr

min 

> x∈Sg

∥y−x∥22,

(7) where we sample N = 20 , 480 points for each set. Lower CD values indicate better geometric reconstruction. 

Visual Fidelity and Identity. To evaluate appearance preservation and perceptual quality compared to the source reference, we utilize three metrics: • SSIM: The Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) measures the similarity between the rendered view x and the ground truth y based on luminance, contrast, and structure: SSIM (x, y ) = (2 μxμy + C1)(2 σxy + C2)(μ2 

> x

+ μ2 

> y

+ C1)( σ2 

> x

+ σ2 

> y

+ C2) , (8) where μ and σ2 denote the mean and variance, and σxy is the covariance. • LPIPS: To capture perceptual similarity closer to hu-man judgment, we compute the Learned Perceptual Im-age Patch Similarity (LPIPS). It measures the L2 distance between deep features extracted from AlexNet: LPIPS (x, y ) = X

> l

1

HlWl

X

> h,w

∥wl⊙(ϕl(x)hw −ϕl(y)hw )∥22,

(9) where ϕl represents the feature map at layer l.• DINO-I: To quantify high-level structural and identity preservation, we calculate the cosine similarity between Figure 17. Qualitative comparison with state-of-the-art methods. The first row displays the single input image used for inference. The other rows show the results from baselines and our method. Note that Trellis, VoxHammer, and Ours display renders of the generated 3D assets, whereas Hunyuan shows 2D image editing results. Our method achieves superior 3D consistency and fidelity to the input instruction compared to both 2D-lifting (Trellis) and 2D-editing (Hunyuan) approaches. 

DINOv2-Base features: DINO-I (x, y ) = Edino (x) · Edino (y)

∥Edino (x)∥∥ Edino (y)∥ . (10) Higher DINO-I scores imply that the edited object retains the core characteristics of the original asset. 

Semantic Alignment. To ensure the edited results strictly follow the text instructions, we calculate the CLIP-Score (CLIP-T) . This metric computes the cosine similarity be-tween the embedding of the generated image I and the text instruction T :CLIP-T (I, T ) = Eimg (I) · Etxt (T )

∥Eimg (I)∥∥ Etxt (T )∥ , (11) using the pre-trained CLIP-ViT-Base-Patch32 model. 

Generative Distribution Quality. To assess the overall quality and diversity of the generated distribution, as well as temporal consistency for videos, we employ Fr´ echet-based distances. • FID: The Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID) measures the distance between the distribution of real images ( pr )and generated images ( pg ) in the feature space of Incep-tionV3: FID = ∥μr − μg ∥22 + Tr 



Σr + Σ g − 2(Σ r Σg )1/2

,

(12) where (μ, Σ) represent the mean and covariance of the features. • FVD: For video sequences, we utilize the Fr´ echet Video Distance (FVD). Similar to FID, it computes the distribu-tion distance but uses an I3D network trained on Charades to capture spatiotemporal features, ensuring the temporal coherence of the generated 3D rotations. C. Comparison with SOTA Methods 

To validate the versatility of BVE in handling both local and global editing tasks, we benchmark it against TREL-LIS, HUNYUAN, and VoxHammer[36]. VoxHammer rep-resents the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) in training-free approaches but relies heavily on edited reference images and explicit mask inputs. Our results demonstrate that BVE preserves exceptional consistency in non-edited regions, at-tributed to the robust generative capabilities of the Edit-FlowTransformer and the regularization provided by our proposed mask loss. In contrast, VoxHammer operates via inversion and attention manipulation within a fixed native latent space. Consequently, it inherently lacks the capacity to perform significant global spatial transformations. This comparative analysis underscores the superior applicability of our method: BVE achieves SOTA performance in both local and global 3D editing with high fidelity, all while elim-inating the need for user-provided masks. 

# D. Limitations and Future work 

While our model demonstrates robust capabilities in 3D editing, several limitations remain. First, regarding the structured latent representation, we employ a two-stage editing pipeline that initially generates the edited sparse structures, followed by the synthesis of the associated lo-cal latents. Compared to end-to-end approaches capable of producing complete 3D assets in a single pass, our method may exhibit lower inference efficiency. Second, the fidelity of our results is heavily contingent upon the capabilities of the underlying Image-to-3D backbone. Consequently, the generated assets often exhibit a strong stylized appearance inherited from the base model. Future improvements will focus on integrating more robust foundation models and enhancing generalization capabilities across diverse editing scenarios. We leave these investigations for future work. Figure 18. More results generated by with AI Prompts Figure 19. More results generated by with AI Prompts